Suman Lata And Ors. vs Madan Mohan Sonkar And Ors. on 17 November, 2005
Suman Lata And Ors. vs Madan Mohan Sonkar And Ors. on 17
November, 2005
Equivalent citations: I(2007)ACC209, AIR 2006 (NOC) 1505 (ALL), 2006 (4)
ALL LJ 408, 2006 (4) ALJ 408, 2006 A I H C 2755, (2006) 3 TAC 623, (2007) 1
ACC 209
Author: R.P. Yadav
Bench: R.P. Yadav
JUDGMENT
U.K. Dhaon, J.
1. These are the two First Appeals from Order under Section 173 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
directed against the judgment and award dated 7th August, 2001, passed by Motor Accident Claims
Tribunal/II Additional District Judge, Faizabad, directing the appellant-Assurance Company to pay
a sum ' of Rs. 16,09,000, as compensation with interest @ 9% per annum from the date of filing of
the petition till the date of actual payment.
2. F.A.F.O. No. 510 of 2001 has been filed by the New India Assurance Company Ltd. challenging
the legality and correctness of the award directing the payment of the aforesaid sum, whereas
F.A.F.O. No. 509 of 2001 has been filed by the claimants for enhancement of the amount of
compensation.
3. Both the appeals having arisen out of the same judgment and award and common questions of
law and fact being involved, we propose to dispose of both the appeals by this common judgment.
4. Briefly stated facts giving rise to these appeals are that Dr. Kamlesh Kumar, who was an Eye
Surgeon, aged about 43 years, while moving on his Scooter No. U.P. 42/1395 was knocked down by
a Jeep, bearing registration No. P. 42-A 0174. He sustained serious injuries. A vehicle belonging to
the Health Department of the district, was coming from the opposite side, wherefrom Dr. Kamlesh
Kumar was taken to the hospital by eye-witnesses, where he was declared "brought dead".
5. The report of the incident was lodged by one Shri Ram Prasad at Police Station, Ayodhya, who
along with Shri Hari Kishan PW 2 had allegedly seen the accident.
6. It is undisputed that the said jeep was insured with the appellant, the New India Assurance
Company Ltd. and driver, Shri Gaya Prasad, who was driving the vehicle at the relevant time under
 1

Suman Lata And Ors. vs Madan Mohan Sonkar And Ors. on 17 November, 2005
the direction of the owner, Shri Madan Mohan Sonkar, DW 1, was having a valid driving licence. The
widow of the deceased, Smt. Suman Lata, his children and father preferred a claim petition before
the Tribunal on the allegations that the accident took place due to rash and negligent driving of the
said jeep, which had hit the deceased from behind.
7. The appellant Assurance Company as well as the owner of the vehicle in question contested the
claim. They denied the accident with the said jeep and pleaded that the claimant respondents were
not entitled to any compensation.
8. On behalf of the claimant respondents, Smt. Sumanlata PW 1, Shri Harikishan, PW 2 and Shri
Devendra Nath Singh PW 3 were examined, whereas the owner of the vehicle examined himself as
DW 1 and one Shri Ram Sunder Maurya, DW 2.
9. The learned Tribunal considered the entire evidence and arrived at the conclusion that the
accident took place due to rash and negligent driving of the jeep and that at the relevant time, salary
of Dr. Kamlesh Kumar was Rs. 9,776 per month and his dependents were entitled to a compensation
of Rs. 15,92,000 on the principles laid down in the case of General Manager, State Road Transport
Corporation, Kerala v. Susamma Thomas (Mrs.) and Ors. . He further held that the
claimant-respondents were entitled for Rs. 15,000 for loss of consortium, love and affection and a
sum of Rs. 2,000 for funeral expenses. The Tribunal holding the appellant Company liable to make
the payment under the terms and conditions of the policy held that the liability to make the entire
payment was on the appellant. The Tribunal, accordingly, mulcted the liability for the payment of
Rs. 16,09,000 on the Assurance Company along with interest thereon as said above.
10. Feeling aggrieved, the Assurance Company and also claimants respondents have preferred these
appeals.
11. We have heard Mr. M.S. Kotwal for the appellant and Shri S.M. Nasir and Mr. Kamlesh Singh for
the claimant-respondents.
12. It is submitted by the learned Counsel for the appellant Assurance Company that the accident
had occurred due to collision of jeep and scooter, whereon the deceased has been travelling at the
time of the accident and that a plea of contributory negligence has been raised in the written
statement but the learned Tribunal had recorded no findings at all nor has even discussed the plea
of contributory negligence raised by the appellant-Assurance Company.
13. A perusal of the judgment impugned in the appeal shows that a categorical finding has been
recorded by the Tribunal that the deceased was going on his scooter while the jeep, which had been
running with a high speed and in negligent and careless manner, hit the scooterist from behind. The
finding, which is based on correct and proper appraisal of the evidence makes the maxim of res ipsa
loquitur applicable to the facts of the present case because the things are so apparent that the
question of contributory negligence does not arise. The plea of contributory negligence can be raised
only, where both the parties were in some respects negligent, when there are the findings in
unambiguous and clear terms that the deceased was hit by the jeep from behind, then no question of
 2

Suman Lata And Ors. vs Madan Mohan Sonkar And Ors. on 17 November, 2005
contributory negligence on the part of the deceased arises and the things being obvious, apparent '
and self-speaking, there was no question of any contributory negligence on the part of the deceased.
It is true that no specific finding has been recorded by the learned Tribunal on the plea of the
contributory negligence but as said above, the facts being clear and self-speaking, there was no need
to consider such a plea which was evidently unsustainable and not recording any finding thereon
does not in any way affect or legally vitiate the final judgment. Affirmative findings recorded by the
Tribunal may be taken as negating the case of contributory negligence set up by the appellant.
14. The learned Counsel could not place or point out any material on record to justify or substantiate
his plea of contributory negligence on the part of the deceased. The argument raised by the learned
Counsel for the appellant Assurance ' Company has no substance and absence of any finding that
there was no contributory negligence on the part of the deceased specially when there are findings
that the accident took place due to rash and negligent driving of the jeep, cannot in any way
invalidate the judgment/award of the Tribunal.
15. It is, next, submitted by the learned Counsel for the appellant Assurance ' Company that the
learned Tribunal has adopted a wrong formula in determining the quantum of compensation.
According to him the compensation is not a windfall or a bonanza for the victims of the accident but
it has to be just, reasonable and proper as held in the case of the Divisional Controller, K.S.R.T.C. v.
Mahadeva Shetty 111 (2003) ACC 57, that "it has to be kept in view that the Tribunal constituted
under the Act as provided in Section 168 is required to make an award determining the amount of
compensation which to it appears to be just. It has to be borne in mind that compensation for loss of
limbs or life can hardly be weighed in golden scales.... the compensation is not expected to be a
windfall for the victim. Statutory provisions clearly indicate that the compensation must be "just"
and it cannot be a bonanza; and a source of profit but the same should not be a pittance; The Courts
and Tribunals have a duty to weigh the various factors and quantify the amount of compensation,
which should be just. What would be "just" compensation is a vexed question. There can be no
golden rule applicable to all cases for measuring the value of human life or a limb. Measure of
damages cannot be arrived at by precise mathematical calculations. It would depend upon the
particular facts and circumstances, and attending peculiar or special features, if any. Every method
or mode adopted for assessing compensation has to be considered in the background of just
compensation, which is the pivotal consideration. Though by use of the expression "which appears
to it to be just" a I wide discretion is vested in the Tribunal, the determination has to be rational, to
be done by a judicious approach and not the outcome of whims, wild guesses and arbitrariness. The
expression "just" denotes equitability, fairness and reasonableness, and non-arbitrary. If it is not so
it cannot be just see Helen C. Rebello v. Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation II (1998)
ACC 512 (SC).
16. The learned Counsel for the claimant-respondents did not dispute this legal position that the
compensation awarded must be just, fair and reasonable.
17. It was next urged on behalf of the appellant that the monthly salary of Dr. Kamlesh Kumar was
Rs. 9,776 and an arbitrary amount was fixed by the Tribunal as Rs. 13,962 and the multiplier of 10
was applied for arriving at the just compensation and the deduction of 1/3rd for the own expenses of
 3

Suman Lata And Ors. vs Madan Mohan Sonkar And Ors. on 17 November, 2005
the deceased was not made. The learned Counsel has further submitted that the aforesaid
conclusion was not only imaginary but arbitrary, wrong and erroneous and the compensation could
not be determined without having deducted 1/3rd of the salary for the personal expenses of the
deceased. A reference was made to the case of Asha and Ors. v. United India Insurance Co. Ltd. and
Anr. I (2004) ACC 533. It was held in this case that the loss suffered by the dependents is the
amount which they would have been receiving at the time when the deceased was alive. There can be
no doubt that the dependents should only be receiving the net amount less 1/3rd for his personal
expenses. On behalf of the claimant/respondents, it is submitted that the pay of the deceased, Dr.
Kamlesh Kumar was revised w.e.f. 1st January, 1996 and his monthly salary was fixed at Rs. 12,593
and that had the deceased not died a premature death on account of this accident, he had the
chances of better future prospects of advancement in service career including the promotion on the
higher post and in higher scale and that the principles laid down in the case of Smt. Sarla Dixit and
Anr. v. Balwant Yadav , ought to have been adopted and the monthly dependency of the
claimant-respondents sought to have been fixed at Rs. 25,000 per month just double of Rs. 12,593.
It was further submitted that the learned Tribunal was wrong in applying the principles of Susamma
Thomas case without taking into consideration the revised pay scale and the future prospects of
advancement in service career and it has also erred in applying the multiplier of 10 instead of 12.
18. Lastly, it was submitted that the appellant had no permission under Section 170 of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1980 so it cannot challenge the quantum of compensation. Reliance was placed on the
case of Chinnama George and Ors. v. N.K. Raju and Anr. reported in I (2000) ACC 577 (SC) : 2000
(2) TAC 207. The Hon'ble Apex Court had ruled in this case that Sections 146, 147, 149 and 173 are
in the scheme of the Act and when read together mean: (1) it is legally obligatory to ensure the
Motor Vehicle against third party risk. Driving an uninsured vehicle is an offence punishable with an
imprisonment extending up to three months or the fine which may extend to Rs. 1,000 or both; (2)
policy of insurance must comply with the requirement as contained in Section 147 of the Act; (3) it is
obligatory for the insurer to satisfy the judgment and awards against the person insured in respect
of third party risks. These are Sub-sections (1) and (7) of Section 149. Grounds on which insurer can
avoid his liability are given in Sub-section (2) of Section 149.
If none of the conditions as contained in Sub-section (2) of Section 149 exist for the insurer to avoid
the policy of insurance, he is legally bound to satisfy the award, he cannot be a person aggrieved by
the award. In that case, insurer will be barred from filing any appeal against the award of the Claims
Tribunal.
19. We have considered over the submissions made by the learned Counsel for the parties.
20. In Susamma Thomas case the Hon'ble Apex Court has held that the determination of quantum
of compensation must answer what contemporary society "would deem to be a fair sum such as
would allow the wrong-doer to hold up his head among his neighbours and say with their approval
that he has done the fair thing". The amount awarded must not be niggardly since the "law values
life and limb in a free society in generous scales". All this means that the sum awarded must be fair
and reasonable by accepted legal standards.
 4

Suman Lata And Ors. vs Madan Mohan Sonkar And Ors. on 17 November, 2005
21. In Divisional Controller K.S.R.T.C. v. Mahadeva Shetty and Ors. (supra), the Hon'ble Apex Court
dealing with the question of just compensation held that the term 'compensation' as stated in the
Oxford Dictionary, signifies that which is given in recompense, and equivalent rendered. 'Damages'
on the other hand constitute the sum of money claimed are adjudged to be paid in compensation for
loss or injury sustained, the value estimated in money, of something lost or withheld. The term
'compensation' etymologically suggests the image of balancing one thing against another, its
primary signification is equivalence, and the secondary and more common meaning is something
given or obtained as an equivalent. Pecuniary damages are to be valued on the basis of full
compensation'. That concept was first stated by Lord Blackborn in Livingstone v. Raywards Coal Co.
1980 AC 25.
The damages for vehicular accidents are in the nature of compensation in money for loss of any kind
caused to any person. In case of personal injury the position is different from loss of property. In the
later case, there is possibility of repair or restoration. But in the case of personal injury, the
possibility of repair or restoration is practically non-existent. In Parry v. Cleaver 1969 (1) ALLER
555 Lord Morris stated as follows:
To compensate in money for pain and for physical consequences is invariably
difficult, but...no other process can be devised than that of making monetary
assessment.
The main principles of law on compensation for injuries worked out in 19th Century,
where railways accidents were becoming common and all actions were tried by Jury.
Though the cases have antiquated air it is still useful to refer to them. The necessity
that damages should be 'full' and 'adequate' was stressed by the Court by Queen's
Bench in Fair v. London and North Western Railway Co. (1869) 21 LT 326. The word
'compensation' is derived from Latin word "compensare" meaning "weigh together"
or "balance". In Rushton v. National Coal Board 1953 (1) AIIER 314, it was observed:
Every member of this Court is anxious to do all he can to ensure that the damages for
an injury and to help the parties and others to arrive at a fair and just figure.
This Court in R.D. Hattangadi v. Pest Control (India) Pvt. Ltd. , laying the principles
posited:
Broadly speaking, while fixing the amount of compensation payable to a victim of an
accident the damages have to be assessed separately as pecuniary damages and
special damages. Pecuniary damages are those which the victim has actually incurred
and which are capable of being calculated in terms of money; whereas non-pecuniary
damages are those which are capable of being assessed by arithmetical calculations.
In order to appreciate two concepts pecuniary damages may include expenses
incurred by the claimant, (i) medical attendance; (ii) loss of earning or profit up to
the date of trial; (iii) other material loss. So far as non-pecuniary damages are
concerned, they may include, (i) damages for mental and physical shock, pain and
 5

Suman Lata And Ors. vs Madan Mohan Sonkar And Ors. on 17 November, 2005
suffering already suffered or likely to be suffered in future; (ii) damages to
compensate for the loss of amenities of life which may include a variety of matters,
i.e., on account of injury the claimant may not be able to walk, run or sit; (iii)
damages for the loss of expectation of life, i.e., on account of injury the normal
longevity of the person concerned is shortened, (iv) inconvenience, hardship,
discomfort, disappointment, frustration and mental stress in life.
22. It is the light of the aforesaid authorities that the question of just compensation will have to be
determined and it has to be seen as to whether the Tribunal was right in awarding the sum in
question.
23. Dr. Kamlesh Kumar, who was an Eye Surgeon and having bright chances of promotion and
higher pay scales in future died on account of this accident on 12th August, 1996. At the time of his
death, he was aged 43 years and getting salary of Rs. 9,776 in the old scale. Judicial notice can be
taken of this fact that the pay scales of all the Government servants including the Medical Officers
were revised w.e.f. 1st January, 1996 pursuant to the recommendation of the V Pay Commission. In
the revised pay scale, his salary on the date of this accident was Rs. 12,593. Copy of relevant
Government order sanctioning new pay scales to the employees of the State has been brought on
record.
24. The learned Tribunal has applied the principles laid down in Susamma Thomas case, where the
deceased getting monthly salary of Rs. 1,032, aged about 38 years died in a motor accident. The
Hon'ble Apex Court keeping in view the future prospects of advancement in career fixed his monthly
salary at Rs. 2,000 and for the purpose of dependency determined the monthly income at Rs. 1,400
per month as the dependency.
25. In Sarla Dixit's case, the deceased, who was the soul bread winner in the family had died at the
age of 27 years by motor accident. His gross salary at the time of his death was Rs. 1,543. The
Hon'ble Supreme Court keeping in view the future prospects, which the deceased had in military
service in the light of his brilliant academic record and performance in the military service spread
over seven years and also keeping in view the other imponderables like accidental deaths while
discharging military service, considered it to be reasonable to predicate that his gross monthly
income would have shot up to at least double than what he was earning at the time of his death, but
for working out the amount of compensation, added a similar amount of Rs. 1,500 and divided the
same by 2 and assessed his salary at Rs. 2,200 per month and computed the compensation
accordingly.
26. The learned Tribunal while determining the compensation payable to claimant-respondents has
adopted the principles laid down in Susammia Thomas case and it was on that basis that it has
worked out the amount of compensation, while doing so it has applied the multiplier of 10 only,
whereas in Schedule II under Section 163A of the Motor Vehicles Act, which provides for the
structured formula, the multiplier at the age of 43 years should have been 12 but looking to the fact
that if we take the revised monthly salary of the deceased into consideration as it was fixed on the
date of accident under the revised pay scale and adding there to the promotional chances and then
 6

Suman Lata And Ors. vs Madan Mohan Sonkar And Ors. on 17 November, 2005
applying the multiplier of 12 the amount will almost will remain the same, as has been awarded by
the Tribunal. No much difference is likely to be caused in amount awarded by the Tribunal,
therefore, although we find that multiplier has not been correctly applied but the principles of
Susamma Thomas case having been adopted by the learned Tribunal and the amount to which it has
arrived at being just and reasonable, we are not inclined to interfere with the amount of
compensation and also for the reason that the Assurance Company cannot challenge the quantum of
compensation without having permission under Section 170 of the Act. Deduction of 1/3rd was also
not required to be made because the Tribunal while applying aforesaid formula of the case of
Susamma Thomas straightaway fixed the amount of compensation at 9,776 x 1400/1032=13262 per
month instead of calculating it on the principle of 9,776 X2000/1032.
This shows that the amount of monthly income was fixed after deducting more than 1/3rd amount,
so, no illegality was committed by the Tribunal in awarding the aforesaid sum of compensation to
the claimant-respondents without making any further deduction.
27. In a similar case of New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Smt. Kiran Singh II , where wrong multiplier
was applied. The Hon'ble Apex Court held as follows:
It is contended that the multiplier of 43 applied by the Tribunal is erroneous. In this
connection, the learned Counsel for the appellant had referred to the decision of this
Court in U.P. State Road Transport Corporations. Trilok Chandra , wherein this
Court has held that the multiplier should not be more than 18. The Tribunal while
applying the 43 multiplier had considered the age of the deceased being 27 years and
if he had not died in the accident he would have lived up to the age of 70 years and
one day he would have been promoted to the post of Chief Engineer. Keeping the
aforesaid background in view, the High Court was of the view, that if the multiplier is
reduced and multiplicand is enhanced not much difference would be caused to the
amount fixed by the Tribunal. Even otherwise it is trite law that the Insurance
Company is not capable to challenge the quantum of compensation. Insurance is a
covenant of good faith, where both parties are covenanted to abide by the terms and
conditions of the policy. In the premises aforesaid, it is clear that the Company has
made a deliberate attempt to escape the liability by introducing a copy of the policy
other than the insured. Often, the terms and conditions are being accepted more in
breach than observance. Insurance Company must bear in mind that they are the
trustees of the public. Keeper of the public coffer. Often, even genuine claims are
being hotly contested in a routine manner by dragging the parties to Courts, wasting
enormous time and money for the claimants to get their claims settled. The act like
Motor Vehicles Act being beneficial legislation aimed at quick redressal of the victims
of accident arising out of the use of motor vehicles, the attitude routinely adopted by
the Insurance Company would render the object of the Act frustrated. If such
instances are brought to the Court, the Court would be obliged to dismiss the appeal
with heavy costs, apart from deprecating such practices.
 7

Suman Lata And Ors. vs Madan Mohan Sonkar And Ors. on 17 November, 2005
28. So far as the question of enhancement is concerned, we after calculating the amount in the
revised pay scale also find that there will be no material change in the total sum awarded by the
learned Tribunal, therefore, there is no good ground for enhancement of compensation awarded by
the learned Tribunal. Even formula adopted in the case of Satla Dixit's case (supra) will not help the
claimant-respondents in any way in getting any additional sum of compensation than that has
already been awarded.
29. The Tribunal has awarded the interest on the aforesaid amount of compensation @ 9% per
annum. It is submitted that the said amount is highly excessive. In New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v.
Charlie II (2005) ACC 74 (SC) : 2005 (2) TAC 257 and Tamil Nadu State Road Transport
Corporation ltd. v. Section Raj Priya and Ors. II (2005) ACC 476 (SC) : 2005 (2) TAC 305, keeping
in view the Bank rate the interest was allowed @ 7.5% per annum only. In view of the above, we are
of the view that the interest should be reduced to 7.5% per annum.
30. Before parting with the judgment, we would like to note that one of the claimant-respondents
was a woman, whereas other four were the minors and one of them the father of the deceased was
old and aged about 70 years but the learned Tribunal has not issued any direction for protecting
their interest from the amount of compensation being frittered away by indiscreet expenditure
without realizing that the money will be needed to be preserved for their future maintenance and
upkeep and did not follow the guidelines issued by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Susamma Thomas
case wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court referring to guidelines issued earlier observed that "the
Tribunal will take into account what measures of safety are required to be adopted to protect the
interests of the minors. Even in respect of the claimants who are sui juris, their interests, if they are
illiterate or semi-literate, must also be protected from possible exploitation.
In a case of compensation for death in accident cases it is appropriate that the Tribunals do keep in
mind the principles enunciated by the Gujarat High Court in (1982) 1 Guj. L.R. 756, as approved by
the Supreme Court in Union Carbide Corporation v. Union of India , in the matter of appropriate
investments to safeguard the feed from being frittered away by the beneficiaries owing to ignorance,
illiteracy and susceptibility to exploitation.
(i) The Claims Tribunal should, in the case of minors, invariable order the amount of
compensation awarded to the minor be invested in long term fixed deposits at least
till the date of the minor attaining majority. The expenses incurred by the guardian or
next friend may, however, be allowed to be withdrawn;
(ii) In the case of illiterate claimants also the Claims Tribunal should follow the
procedure set out in (i) above, but if lump sum payment is required for effecting
purchases of any movable or immovable property such as, agricultural implements,
rickshaw, etc. to earn a living, the Tribunal may consider such a request after making
sure that the amount is actually spent for the purpose and the demand is not a ruse to
withdraw money.
 8

Suman Lata And Ors. vs Madan Mohan Sonkar And Ors. on 17 November, 2005
(iii) In the case of semi-literate persons the Tribunal should ordinarily resort to the
procedure set out at (i) above unless it is satisfied, for reasons to be stated in writing,
that the whole or part of the amount is required for expending and existing business
or for purchasing some property as mentioned in (ii) above for earning his livelihood,
in which case the Tribunal will ensure that the amount is invested for the purpose for
which it its demanded and paid;
(iv) In the case of literate persons also the Tribunal may resort to the procedure
indicated in (i) above subject to the relaxation set out in (ii) and (iii) above, if having
regard to the age, fiscal background and strata of society to which the claimant
belongs and such other considerations, the Tribunal in the large interest of the
claimant and with a view to ensuring the safety of the compensation awarded to him
thinks it necessary to do order.
(v) In the case of widows the Claims Tribunal Should invariably follow the procedure
set out in (i) above.
31. While expection that the aforesaid guidelines will be followed by the Tribunals while making an
award in favour of the minors, illiterates, aged and old persons, we feel that a direction should be
issued that the amount awarded to the minors should be deposited in some filed deposit yielding
high returns/dividends.
32. In view of the conclusions aforestated, both the appeals are dismissed except with a modification
in the rate of interest which we reduce and allow @7.5% only instead 9% per annum.
33. The amount of the share of the minors shall be deposited in some nationalized bank or
Government security yielding high returns, initially for a period of three years, which shall be
renewed from time-to-time till the minor-claimants attain the majority. However, the interests
payable thereon shall be permitted to be withdrawn by their mother for their maintenance.
34. No order as to costs.
 9