Sunil Shreesail Killiket vs Subbraya on 18 July, 2024
Sunil Shreesail Killiket vs Subbraya on 18 July, 2024
KABC020301942021
IN THE COURT OF III ADDL.JUDGE AND MOTOR
ACCIDENT CLAIMS TRIBUNAL, COURT OF SMALL
CAUSES BENGALURU
(SCCH-18)
Dated: This 18th day of July 2024
Present: LAVANYA H.N. B.Sc., LL.B.,
III ADDL. JUDGE &
MEMBER, MACT
COURT OF SMALL CAUSES,
BENGALURU.
M.V.C.No.5135/2021
Petitioner Shri Sunil Shreesail Killiket,
Son of Shreesail Killiket,
Aged about 24 years,
Residing at Hiremasali,
Tamba, Indi Taluk,
Vijaypura-856 215.
(By Pleader Smt.Vedashree)
V/s
Respondents 1.Mr.Subbaray,
Son of Narsimhaiah,
Aged about 43 years,
Residing at No.78, Alluru
Devanahalli Taluk,
Bengaluru Rural District,
Karnataka -567 110.
SCCH-18 2 MVC No. 5135/2021
(By Pleader Shri P.Prasad)
2.Bajaj Allianz General
Insurance Co. Ltd.,
Golden Heights 4th floor,
No.1/2, 59th C Cross,
4th Block, Rajajinagar,
Bengaluru.
(By Pleader Shri K.Nagaraja)
 1

Sunil Shreesail Killiket vs Subbraya on 18 July, 2024
JUDGMENT
The petitioner has filed the petition under Section 166 of Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, claiming
compensation for the injuries sustained by him in a road traffic accident dated 09.01.2021.
2. The brief facts of the petitioner's case are as under:
(a) That on 09.01.2021 at about 5.30 p.m., the petitioner being one of the inmates in
the car bearing registration No.KA-03-AC-5300 (hereinafter this vehicle has been
referred to as offending vehicle) along with his friends proceeding in the offending
vehicle which was driven by Appu @ Bhagyodaya Shivapura. When they reached near
Ambha Dresses situated at opposite to IB near MG Patel Hospital, Indi, DS,
Vijayapura, at that time driver of said car drove the same in a rash and negligent
manner and suddenly turned the car, as a result of which, the car was out of control
and it fell down and rotated on the side of the said road. Due to the impact, the
petitioner and his friends were sustained grievous injuries, the offending vehicle was
completely damaged.
(b) It is further pleaded that immediately after the accident the petitioner was shifted
to Vedanta Hospital, Vijayapura and then he was shifted to Vasudeva Hospital
wherein he was treated as an inpatient from 9.1.2021 to 12.1.2021. Again he was
shifted to Sparsh Multi Speciality Hospital, Bengaluru, wherein he was treated as an
inpatient from 13.1.2021 to 10.3.2021.
The petitioner has spent sum of Rs.44,98,831/- towards medical expenses, treatment charges,
medicine, nourishment food and for regular treatment.
(c) It is further case of the petitioner that at the time of the accident the petitioner was aged about
24 years. He was running a provision stores and getting an income of Rs.45,000/- per month. On
account of accidental injuries the family members have lost the only bread earner of the family. The
respondent No.1 being the owner and the respondent No.2 being the insurer of the offending vehicle
are jointly and severally liable to pay the compensation of Rs.99,99,999/- with interest from the
date of petition till realization.
3. In response to the notice the respondents No.1 & 2 have appeared through their respective
advocates on record. The respondent No.2 has filed the written statement but, the respondent No.1
has not chosen to file written statement.
4(a) The respondent No.2 in its written statement has denied the entire case of the petitioner as
false. The respondent No.1 has denied the manner in which the accident took place, injuries
sustained, avocation, age and income of the petitioner as false. However, it is admitted that the
offending vehicle was insured with the respondent No.1 and it is subject to terms and conditions of
the policy.
 2

Sunil Shreesail Killiket vs Subbraya on 18 July, 2024
4(b) It is the defense of the respondent No.2 that the driver of the offending vehicle was not holding
valid and effective driving license at the time of the accident. It is further contended that the vehicle
was used in public place without having a valid permit and fitness certificate.
4(c) It is further contention of the respondent No.2 that the offending vehicle was not at all involved
in the accident. It is contended that the compensation and interest claimed by the petitioner is
exorbitant. Upon these grounds, it is prayed to dismiss the petition.
5. On the basis of the pleadings, my predecessor- in-office has framed the following issues:
1. Whether the petitioner proves that he had sustained grievous injuries in a motor
vehicle accident that was taken place on 9.1.2021 at about 5.30 p.m. near Sangogi,
Hiremasali due to the rash and negligent driving of the driver of the car bearing
registration No.KA-03-AC-
5300 in actionable negligence?
2. Whether the petitioner is entitled for compensation as prayed for? If so, at what rate? from
whom?
3. What order or award?
6. The petitioner to prove his case he himself examined as PW1 and also examined two witnesses
namely Manju Ram Shillikshathri and Dr.Shailesh A.V.Rao as PW2 and 3 respectively and got the
documents marked at Ex.P1 to Ex.P25. On the other hand, the respondent No.2 has examined
Senior Executive - TP claims of the Insurance-Company as RW1 and got the documents marked at
Ex.R1 to Ex.R4.
7. Having heard the arguments of learned counsel for the petitioner and respondent No.2 and on
perusal of the materials available on record including the written arguments submitted by the
learned counsel for the petitioner, the answers to the above issues are as under:
Issue No.1 - In the Affirmative;
Issue No.2 - See the finding;
Issue No.3- As per the final order for the following:
REASONS Issue No.1:
8. It is the case of the petitioner that the petitioner has sustained grievous injuries in the accident
which is result of rash and negligent driving of the driver of the offending vehicle whereas the
respondent No.2 has denied the case of the petitioner and has taken up the defense that the
offending vehicle was not involved in the accident.
 3

Sunil Shreesail Killiket vs Subbraya on 18 July, 2024
9. The petitioner/PW1 in his examination-in-chief by way of affidavit has reiterated the averments
made in the petition with regard to the alleged accident. The petitioner in support of his oral
evidence to prove issue No.1 has placed reliance upon Ex.P1 to Ex.P7.
10. Ex.P1 is the true copy of the F.I.R. in Crime No.9/2021 Indi Rural Police Station, Vijayapura.
Ex.P2 is the true copy of the first information statement which was given by petitioner when he was
in Vasudeva Hospital, Vijayapura. Ex.P3 is the true copy of the crime detail form. Ex.P4 is the true
copy of the IMV report. Ex.P5 is the true copy of the wound certificate of the petitioner. Ex.P6 is the
true copy of the hand sketch. Ex.P7 is the true copy of the charge sheet in Cr.No.9/2021 of Indi
Rural Police Station, Vijayapura.
11. PW1/petitioner was subjected to lengthy cross-examination on behalf of the respondent No.2,
but nothing was elicited from the mouth of petitioner which supports the defence of the respondent
No.2 that the offending vehicle was not involved in the accident and it was implicated with the help
of the owner and police.
12. On perusal of the aforesaid police documents at Ex.P1 to P7, it could be seen that based upon the
first information statement given by the petitioner, the S.H.O. of Indi Rural Police Station,
Vijayapura has registered the case against the driver of the offending vehicle for the offenses
punishable under Section 279, 337 and 338 of I.P.C. Upon investigation, the investigation officer has
filed the charge sheet against the driver of the offending vehicle for the offences punishable under
sections 279. 337, 338 of IPC and 3 read with 181 of IMV Act.
13. Though the respondent No.2 has taken up the defense that the offending vehicle was not
involved in accident, the respondent No.2 has failed to substantiate the same either by getting any
admission from the mouth of the PW1 who is the injured in the alleged accident or examining any
independent witness or at least examining the driver of the offending vehicle to prove the defense.
Hence, it is held that the respondent No.2 has failed to prove the defense that offending vehicle was
not involved in the accident.
14. Over all assessing the evidence of PW1 coupled with police documents at Ex.P1 to P7, it is held
that the petitioner has sustained grievous injuries in the accident which is result of rash and
negligent driving of the driver of the offending vehicle. Hence, issue No.1 is answered in the
Affirmative.
Issue No.2:
15. The petitioner has claimed the compensation of Rs.99,99,999/- under different heads.
16. In Raj Kumar Vs. Ajay Kumar and another case, which is reported in (2011) 1 SCC 343, wherein
the Hon'ble Supreme Court has laid down general principles relating to compensation in injury
cases and the heads under which compensation to be awarded in personal injury cases. The Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Pappu Deo Yadav Vs. Naresh Kumar and Others reported in AIR 2020 SCC 4424
wherein it is held that:
 4

Sunil Shreesail Killiket vs Subbraya on 18 July, 2024
"In parting, it needs to be underlined that Courts should be mindful that a serious
injury not only permanently imposes physical limitations and disabilities but too
often inflicts deep mental and emotional scars upon the victim. The attendant trauma
of the victim's having to live in a world entirely different from the one she or he is
born into, as an invalid, and with degrees of dependence on others, robbed of
complete personal choice or autonomy, should forever be in the judge's mind,
whenever tasked to adjudge compensation claims. Severe limitations inflicted due to
such injuries undermine the dignity (which is now recognized as an intrinsic
component of the right to life under Article 21) of the individual, thus depriving the
person of the essence of the right to a wholesome life which she or he had lived,
hitherto. From the world of the able bodied, the victim is thrust into the world of the
disabled, itself most discomfiting and unsettling. If courts nit- pick and award
niggardly amounts oblivious of these circumstances, there is resultant affront to the
injured victim."
17. It is the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that petitioner is bedridden that
means to say that he is in vegetative condition as such he could not able to do anything even
including his day to day activities. He was running a provision stores. There are no bread earners in
the family of the petitioner. At the time of the accident the petitioner was aged about 24 years,
unmarried and was earning Rs.45,000/- per month. Due to the accident, petitioner is in wheel chair
and he could not able to stand and to do day-to-day activities without the support of attendant. The
disability caused in the accident is taken away the life of petitioner. Though the physical disability is
90%, the functional disability is 100%. Therefore, the just and reasonable compensation be granted
as prayed for. Learned counsel for the petitioner in support of his argument has placed reliance
upon the following decisions:
i) 2022 Live Law (SC 330) between Master Ayush Vs. the Branch Manager Reliance
General Insurance Co. Ltd.,;
ii) AIR 2020 SC 776 between Kajal Vs. Jagadish Chand and others.
18. By keeping in mind the principle laid down in Raj Kumar Vs. Ajay Kumar and
another; Pappu Deo Yadav Vs. Naresh Kumar and Others's (AIR 2020 SCC 4424);
Perminder Singh Vs. New India Assurance Company Ltd. and others (2019 (7) SCC
217); Kajal Vs. Jagadish Chand and others (2020 (4) SCC 413); V. Mekala Vs. M.
Malathi and another (Civil AppealNo.4880/2014 decided on 25.4.2014) & Master
Ayush Vs. the Branch Manager Reliance General Insurance Co. Ltd. ((2022)7 SCC
738)', cases' let this Tribunal to see the case on hand:
i. LOSS OF EARNINGS:
19. In the Raj Kumar's case referred supra the Hon'ble Supreme Court has also held
that "Where the claimant suffers a permanent disability as a result of injuries, the
assessment of compensation under the head of loss of future earnings, would depend
 5

Sunil Shreesail Killiket vs Subbraya on 18 July, 2024
upon the effect and impact of such permanent disability as the percentage of
economic loss that is percentage of loss of earning capacity arising from a permanent
disability will be different from the percentage of permanent disability." Further, at
para No.10 the Hon'ble Supreme Court has elaborately discussed with examples and
also given three steps for ascertainment of the effect of the permanent disability on
the actual earning capacity.
20. The petitioner in the petition as well as in the evidence has stated that on account
of accidental injuries he is completely bedridden in position. The movements of the
four limbs also restricted. The accidental injuries completely taken away the life of
petitioner. The disability is permanent in nature. The petitioner could not do any
work.
21. The petitioner to prove the disability sustained in the alleged accident has
examined Dr. Shailesh A.V.Rao as PW3. PW3 in his examination-in-
chief by way of affidavit has stated that he has been working as consultant Neurosurgeon
Padmashree Diagnostics, Bengaluru. PW3 has deposed that the petitioner received first treatment at
Vedanta Hospital on 9.1.2021 and was discharged on 10.1.2021, initially referred to for higher
treatment to Vasudev Hospital, Bijapur wherein he has taken treatment from10.1.2021 to 12.1.2021.
The petitioner was diagnosed with a cervical spine injury with respiratory and sphincter
involvement.
22. PW3 has further deposed that on 13.1.2021 the petitioner was admitted to Sparsh Hospital,
Bengaluru. At the time of treatment the petitioner exhibited weakness in all four limbs with a power
range on 1 3/5 in the upper limbs and 0/5 in the lower limbs. Numbness below T4 was also noted.
Further diagnostic tests reveals the spondyloptosis a C7-C11 level on CT scan of the spine and spinal
cord injury with cord edema from C7 to T1 on MRI of the cervical spine and underwent cervical
traction,C5-C6-C7 laminectomy and C4 to D2 fusion on 18.1.2021. A tracheostomy was also
performed and he was gradually weaned off the mechanical ventilator. Upon discharge on 29.1.2021
the power in the upper limbs improved to 2-4/5 while the lower limbs remained at 0/5 and
numbness persisted below D4. However, he has been unable to resume his previous work in the
cloth shop due to weakness in all four limbs.
23. PW3 has further deposed that upon physical examination the petitioner was unable to stand or
walk, spastic weakness in the lower limbs, weakness in the upper limbs, numbness below T4 and use
of urinary catheter. PW3 has further deposed that petitioner's disability under section F amounts to
90% of the whole body.
24. P.W.3 was subjected to cross-examination on behalf of the respondent No.2 wherein PW3 has
deposed that to maintain the present condition physiotherapy is absolutely required. Though PW3
was subjected to lengthy cross-examination nothing was elicited to disbelieve the evidence of PW3
in his examination-in-chief.
 6

Sunil Shreesail Killiket vs Subbraya on 18 July, 2024
25. On scrutiny of the oral evidence of PW3 coupled with medical documents of the petitioner, it is
no doubt that the petitioner sustained grievous injuries to his spine and and at present he is
bedridden and he has been confined to wheel chair. As per the opinion of PW3 who is a qualified
doctor the petitioner was found to have sever spastic weakness, which amounts to disability of 90%
to whole body. From this it could be said that petitioner unable to do any work including his day to
day personal works such as attending nature call on his own without support of anyone. The injuries
in the accident spoiled life of young youth. In the clear opinion of this Tribunal the disability caused
in the accident affects 100% on his avocation that means to say the functional disability is 100%.
26. The petitioner has stated that he was aged about 24 years at the time of accident. To prove the
age, petitioner has relied upon Ex.P9, notarised copy of Aadhar Card wherein it could be seen that
petitioner was born on 31.5.1996. The accident in question took place on 9.1.2021. From this it is no
doubt that at the time of the accident injured petitioner was aged about 25 years.
27. In the petition and in his first examination- in-chief it is stated that injured petitioner was
running a provision store and was earning Rs.45,000/- per month whereas the petitioner in his
further examination-in-chief dated 13.7.2023 has deposed that he entered in to the mutual
agreement with Manjuram Shillikshatri to do the cloth business on 10.1.2020 though which was
registered in the year 2017. The said business was running in the name and style of "Ambha
Dresses" situated at T.B.Nagar, M.G. Patil hospital, Indi. Turnover of the business is more than
Rs.50,000/- per month.
28. The petitioner in support of his oral evidence has placed reliance upon Ex.P12, Ex.P13 and
Ex.P21. Ex.P12 is the unregistered partnership agreement alleged to have been entered into between
the petitioner and one Manjuram Shillikshatri on 10.1.2020. Ex.P13 is the bunch of invoices having
purchase of materials for the alleged business. Ex.P21 is the income tax returns of the assessment
year 2019-2020 & 2020- 2021.
29. The petitioner in support of his oral evidence has also examined his alleged partner, Manjuram
Shillikshatri as PW2. PW2 in his examination-in-chief has supported the case of the petitioner and
has deposed that he himself and the petitioner entered into partnership agreement on 10.1.2020 for
running cloth business in the name and style of Ambha Dresses". The petitioner and he himself
invested for the said business. Out of the profit they were sharing profits equally. After the accident
he could not able to run the business. They have paid IT returns every year in the name of Ambha
Dresses.
30. Ex.P12 is the unregistered partnership deed. Ex.P13 is the 14 invoices having purchase of the
materials. Based upon these documents it could not be said that the petitioner and the PW2 were
the partners and they were running the business in the name and style of Ambha Dresses". Ex.P21 is
the IT returns of the assessment year 2019-2020 and 2020- 2021 speak that for the above
assessment years IT returns was submitted by PW2 in individual capacity, but not in the name of
"Ambha Dresses". Based upon these documents it could not be said that the petitioner was doing
cloth business along with PW2 and he was getting income more than Rs.50,000/- in the said
business.
 7

Sunil Shreesail Killiket vs Subbraya on 18 July, 2024
31. In the absence of material evidence with regard to income of the injured petitioner, by
considering the age and costs of living the Tribunal has to assess the income of deceased. The
Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka in M.F.A.No.822/2017 between Shri Yashwanth Kancan Vs.
Sudhakara and another decided on 07.02.2020 has taken up the notional income of the deceased
person at Rs.6,500/- as determined by the Karnataka State Legal Services Authority for the Motor
Vehicle Accident victim of the year 2011. The relevant para 12 of the said judgment is as under:
"Having regard to the injury suffered by the claimant and since there was no credible
evidence adduced before the Tribunal, it would be safe to assume the notional income
of the deceased as Rs.6,500/- as determined by the Karnataka State Legal Services
Authority for the Motor Vehicle accident victim of the year 2011."
32. Admittedly, this accident took place in the year 2021. As determined by the Karnataka State
Legal Services Authority for fixing of compensation during the course of negotiation for settlement
before the Lok Adalath, in the absence of the evidence of income, the notional income of the person
would be Rs.15,000/- for the year 2021.
33. By considering the age of the injured petitioner and having considering the notional income
determined above, this tribunal is of the view that it is just and proper to take the income of the
injured petitioner of Rs.15,000/- per month in the absence of the documentary evidence.
34. In Pappu Deo Yadav Vs. Naresh Kumar and Others' case referred supra the Hon'ble Supreme
Court has held that the future prospects can be applied even in the case of permanent disability. The
concept of future prospects is not only applicable in the death cases, it is also applicable in case of
victim suffered permanent disability of serious nature. The Hon'ble Supreme Court at paragraph
No.7 of the aforesaid decision has held that:
"7. Two questions arise for consideration: one, whether in cases of permanent
disablement incurred as a result of a motor accident, the claimant can seek, apart
from compensation for future loss of income, amounts for future prospects too; and
two, the extent of disability. On the first question, the High Court no doubt, is
technically correct in holding that Pranay Sethi involved assessment of compensation
in a case where the victim died. However, it went wrong in saying that later, the
three- judge bench decision in Jagdish was not binding, but rather that the
subsequent decision in Anant to the extent that it did not award compensation for
future prospects, was binding. This court is of the opinion that there was no
justification for the High Court to have read the previous rulings of this court, to
exclude the possibility of compensation for future prospects in accident cases
involving serious injuries resulting in permanent disablement. Such a narrow reading
of Pranay Sethi is illogical, because it denies altogether the possibility of the living
victim progressing further in life in accident cases - and admits such possibility of
future prospects, in case of the victim's death."
 8

Sunil Shreesail Killiket vs Subbraya on 18 July, 2024
35. By applying the principle laid down in Pappu Deo Yadav's case referred supra, this Tribunal is of
the considered opinion that while awarding compensation under the head of future loss of income it
is proper to add future prospects as scheduled in Pranay Sethi's case.
36. As laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Spl. Leave (Civil) No.25590 of 2014 (reported in
2017(2) MACR 1514 (SC)) between National Insurance Company Limited Vs. Pranay Shethi and
others, future prospects has to be added to the income of the petitioner. As the petitioner was aged
about 25 years, 40% of his income has to be added as future prospects. By considering the income of
petitioner of Rs.15,000/- per month, his income per year comes to Rs.1,80,000/-. After adding 40%
o f h i s i n c o m e t o t h e o r i g i n a l a n n u a l i n c o m e , i t c o m e s t o R s . 2 , 5 2 , 0 0 0 / -
(Rs.1,80,000/-+Rs.72,000/-). Due to 100% disability, annual loss of income would be
Rs.2,52,000/-. Since the petitioner was aged about 25 years at the time of accident, the suitable
multiplier is 18. So, the loss of future earning capacity due to the said disability of the petitioner is of
Rs.45,36,000/- (15,000/-+40%)X12X18 =Rs.45,36,000/-). Hence, the petitioner is entitled to
Rs.45,36,000/- under the head future loss of income.
37. Since the future loss of income of the petitioner was considered from the date of accident, the
question of awarding compensation under the head loss of income during laid up period does not
warrant.
ii. Expenses relating to treatment, hospitalization, medicines shortly referred to as Medical
expenses:
38. In the petition it is stated that as on the date of filing of petition he has spent Rs.44,98,831/-
towards medical expenses. PW1 in his examination-in-chief has deposed that the medical expenses
of the petitioner so far of Rs.59,19,503/-. In this regard the petitioner has produced medical bills
which are collectively marked at Ex.P11 (311 bills which includes advance receipt and one ambulance
bill also), Ex.P19 (9 medical bills) & Ex.P20 (2 bills ).
39. Having seen the calculation made by the petitioner in the memo of calculation it appears that by
including the amount covered under the advance receipts sum of Rs.21,61,367/- was calculated. On
careful scrutiny of the medical bills excluding ambulance bill and advance receipts it is seen that
sum of Rs.14,85,260/- was spent towards medical expenses of the petitioner. Hence, it is held that
the petitioner is entitled to Rs.14,85,260/- under the head medical expenses.
iii. Nourishing food expenses, attendant and conveyance:
a) Nourishing Food:
40. Taking nourishment food is equally necessary along with medicines for fast recovery from the
accidental injuries. The petitioner has taken treatment as an inpatient for a period of 61 days as
observed supra.
 9

Sunil Shreesail Killiket vs Subbraya on 18 July, 2024
41. It is true, no material has been placed by the petitioner with regard to amount spent towards
nourishment food. Even it is also difficult to produce and prove the same by way of document.
Having regard to the injuries sustained by the petitioner it could be said that throughout the life of
the petitioner he has to be provided with adequate nutritious food to maintain present status of the
petitioner. While awarding compensation under the head loss of future income, no amount has been
deducted. So, that amount could be made use of for the purpose of nutritious food. Along with that,
it is reasonable to award Rs.1,00,000/- towards nourishment food which was provided to the
petitioner from the date of the accident till today.
b. Conveyance:
42. Since the petitioner could not able to stand and sit, it is not possible to take the petitioner in any
of public conveyance to the hospital. Either parents of the petitioner or any attendant who takes care
of the petitioner has to engage taxi or ambulance whenever they want to take the petitioner for
follow-up treatment. Hence, it is reasonable to award Rs.1,00,000/- towards past and future
conveyance.
c. Attendant charges:
43. In Kajal's case referred supra the Hon'ble Apex Court has held that multiplier system should be
followed not only for determining the compensation on account of loss of income, but also for
determining the attendance charges etc., In the said judgment Hon"ble Apex Court has also
observed that, "at the same time, we are clearly of the view that the tortfeasor cannot take the
benefit of gratuitous services rendered by the family members. When this small girl was taken to
PGI, Chandigarh or was in her village, family members must have accompanied with her. Even if we
are not paying them the attendant charges they must be paid for loss of their wages and the amount
they would have spent in the hospital for food etc.,"
44. It is true, in the case on hand the petitioner has not produced any document to show that one
attendant or nurse was engaged to look after him. It is also relevant to note that the petitioner is
native of Bijapur. Since the petitioner requires higher treatment, he was shifted to Sparsh Hospital,
Bengaluru from Bijapur. Since the parents of the petitioner could not able to bare the expenses of
the Sparsh Hospital, Bengaluru, against the medical advise the petitioner was discharged from the
Sparsh Hospital, Bengaluru and again he was shifted to Vasudeva Hospital, Bijapur. From the date
of accident for a period of three months the petitioner was treated as an inpatient. Thereafter, he
was discharged with the advise of follow- up treatment. As could be seen from the medical bills
placed by the petitioner, the petitioner has taken treatment in various hospitals.
45. The Hon'ble Apex Court in Kajal's case referred supra by considering the age of the child and the
injuries sustained has observed that the petitioner therein will require two attendants. In the above
said case the Hon'ble Apex Court has taken the fees/salary of one attendant at Rs.5,000/- which is
minimum wages payable in the State of Chandigar for skilled labour for the year 2007.
 10

Sunil Shreesail Killiket vs Subbraya on 18 July, 2024
46. As noted above the petitioner is confined to wheel chair and bed. Though in the case on hand the
petitioner is major, he could not able to attend the nature call on his own and he could not able to
take food on his own without the support of the attendant. He could not able to stand and walk even
with the support of the attendant. The petitioner requires attendant who though may not be
medically trained must be capable to handle the bed ridden petitioner. Thus, certainly one attendant
is absolutely required to take care of the petitioner throughout his life. Even if it is considered that
either the mother or sister or father of the petitioner might be taking care of the petitioner without
appointing the attendant then also they will leave their wages for taking care of the petitioner. If the
minimum wages of a person in the year 2021 has been considered then it comes to Rs.15,000/- per
month. Having considering that the petitioner is the resident of Hiremasali, Tamba, Indi Taluk,
Vijayapura, it is proper to take the attendant charges of Rs.8,000/- per month. The multiplier
applicable to the case on hand is '18'. If the attendant charges of Rs.8,000/- per month has been
considered and the multiplier 18 is applied then the petitioner is entitled to Rs.17,28,000/-
(Rs.8,000/- X12X18)towards attendance charges.
iv. Pain, Sufferings and Trauma:
47. The petitioner was aged about 25 years at the time of the accident. Due to the accident he had
permanent disability as noted above. He was not born with permanent disability. As observed supra,
the petitioner has taken treatment as an inpatient for a period of 61 days and still the petitioner is in
vegetative condition. From this any lay man could imagine the pain and suffering and trauma
undergone by the petitioner who was aged about 25 years and born in middle class family. It is not
possible to imagine the mental pain of the petitioner. By considering the injuries sustained by the
petitioner as noted above, its effect and also number of days treatment taken by the petitioner, this
Tribunal is of the considered opinion that it is just and proper to award reasonable and just
compensation of Rs.1,50,000/- to the petitioner under the head pain and sufferings.
v. Loss of Amenities and discomfort:
48. As per the discharge summary at Ex.P8 the petitioner has sustained fracture of bilateral laminae
of C7 vertebra, fractures of spinous process and transverse processes of C7 vertebra, fracture of right
superior articular facet of D1 vertebra, fracture of anterosuperior corner of C7 vertebral body,
fracture of left inferior articular facet of C6 vertebra, fracture of spinous process of C7 vertebra.
From the date of accident the petitioner is bedridden. The petitioner was found to have weakness in
all four limbs, which amounts to disability of 90% to whole body.
49. Social withdrawal can often result, leaving the injured person feeling isolated. His personal
relationships can be heavily affected. The petitioner could not able to enjoy his life as he was
enjoying and others were enjoying due to the alleged accident. Overall considering the difficulties of
the petitioner it is no doubt that the physical disabilities noted above not only put the petitioner in
grief and mental sufferings it also effect on his happiness and it is total discomfort in his life, it has
taken away his amenities. By considering all these aspects this Tribunal is of the considered opinion
that it is just and proper to award reasonable compensation of Rs.1,00,000/- under the head
amenities, happiness and discomfort.
 11

Sunil Shreesail Killiket vs Subbraya on 18 July, 2024
vi. Permanent disability, loss of expectation of life:
50. It is no doubt that the petitioner has sustained grievous injuries in the alleged accident as a
result he has permanent disability as noted above. The disability sustained by the petitioner is
permanent disability but not temporary. This disability is because of the accident. This disability
does not only affect on his amenities, happiness, it also shortens the expected life. Under such
circumstances, it is just and proper to award reasonable compensation under the head permanent
physical disability and loss of expectation of life. Hence, the petitioner is entitled to compensation of
Rs.50,000/- under the head permanent physical disability and loss of expectation of life.
vii. Loss of marriage prospects:
51. As observed above, the whole body disability of the petitioner is 90%. It is true, the petitioner has
100% functional disability. From this it could be said that there is no chance of marriage of the
petitioner. The accidental injury spoiled the life of the petitioner. It has taken away the marital life of
the young age petitioner. It is not possible to fill-up the same by awarding compensation. The
Hon'ble Supreme Court in a V. Mekala's case and Kajal's case referred supra has awarded
compensation of Rs.3,00,000/- towards marriage prospects of injured petitioner who was aged
about 25 years and 12 years respectively. By placing reliance upon the decisions of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court this Tribunal is of the considered opinion that it is reasonable to award just
compensation of Rs.3,00,000/- towards loss of marriage prospects.
viii. Future Medical Expenses:
52. From the evidence of the PW1 and PW3 it is no doubt that to maintain the present status of the
injured petitioner parents of the petitioner has to provide regular physiotherapy throughout the life
of the petitioner. Under such circumstances, this Tribunal is of the considered opinion that it is just
and proper to award reasonable and just compensation of Rs.2,00,000/- to the petitioner under the
head future medical expenses.
Heads of compensation Amount
Loss of Future Income Rs.45,36,000-00
Medical Expenses Rs.14,85,260-00
Food and Nourishment Rs. 1,00,000-00
Conveyance Rs. 1,00,000-00
Attendant charges Rs.17,28,000-00
Pain, suffering and trauma Rs. 1,50,000-00
Loss of amenities, future Rs. 1,00,000-00
happiness, discomfort
Permanent disability and loss of Rs. 50,000-00
expectation of life.
 12

Sunil Shreesail Killiket vs Subbraya on 18 July, 2024
Loss of marriage prospects Rs. 3,00,000-00
Future Medical expenses Rs. 2,00,000-00
Total Rs.87,49,260-00
In all, the petitioner is entitled for the
compensation of Rs.87,49,260/- which is rounded to Rs.87,49,500/- (Rupees Eighty Seven Lakh
Forty Nine Thousand & Five Hundred only).
Regarding the liability to pay the compensation amount:
53. While answering issue No.1, it is held that the accident has occurred on account of the negligence
of the driver of the offending vehicle. The respondent No.1 being the owner of the offending vehicle
is liable to pay the compensation amount to the petitioner.
54. It is one of the defenses of the respondent No.2 that the driver of the offending vehicle has not
possessed driving license to drive the offending vehicle as on the date of accident.
55. As could be seen from the charge sheet, investigation officer has filed the charge sheet against
the driver of the offending vehicle for the offences punishable under section 279, 337 & 338 of IPC
as well as section 3 R/W section 181 of IMV Act. In the charge sheet it is alleged that the driver of the
offending vehicle has not possessed driving licence to drive the offending vehicle as on the date of
accident.
56. Though the respondent No.2 tried to examine the driver of the offending vehicle, he could not
able to secure the driver of the offending vehicle. It is worth to note that the respondent No.1 who is
the owner of the offending vehicle has appeared through advocate. When the respondent No.1
appeared through advocate it is bounden duty of the respondent No.1 to produce driving licence of
the driver of the offending vehicle. But, the respondent No.1 has not produced the driving licence of
the driver of the offending vehicle. Under the circumstances, it could be inferred that since the
driver of the offending vehicle has not possessed the driving licence as on the date of the accident,
the respondent No.1 has not produced the same.
57. It is also worth to note that the petitioner has filed I.A. III under order I Rule 10 of CPC on
19.9.2023 with a prayer to implead the driver of the offending vehicle as one of the respondents in
the case on the ground that the driver of the offending vehicle has not possessed the driving licence
as on the date of accident, as such he is also liable to pay the compensation. In the application, the
petitioner himself has admitted that the driver of the offending vehicle has not possessed the driving
licence to drive the offending vehicle as on the date of the accident. In view of the non-production of
the document by the respondent No.1 coupled with the charge sheet and the statement made by the
petitioner in the affidavit annexed to the application filed under order I rule 10 of CPC it could be
said that the respondent No.1 is the registered owner of the offending vehicle is allowed the driver to
drive the vehicle though he has not possessed the driving licence to drive the offending vehicle.
 13

Sunil Shreesail Killiket vs Subbraya on 18 July, 2024
Hence, it is held that as rightly argued by the learned counsel for the respondent No.2 the
respondent No.1 has breached the fundamental condition of the policy by allowing the driver who
has no driving licence to drive the vehicle.
58. In a decision reported in 2013 (3) T.A.C. 29 (S.C.), between United India Insurance Co. Ltd.,
through its Divisional Manager Vs. Sujata Arora and others, wherein it is held that: when it is found
that offending vehicle was driven by driver who was either holding on license or a fake license, then
it amounts to violation of terms and conditions of policy and no liability can be fastened upon
Insurance Company. From this it is clear that riding/driving vehicle on public road without having
driveling license it is not only an offense punishable under section 3(1) r/w 181 of MV Act but also
fundamental and statutory breach of insurance policy. Hence, the respondent No.2 is not liable to
indemnify the respondent No.1 for the loss suffered by him though there was insurance on the date
of accident. Hence, it is held that the respondent No.2 is not liable to pay the compensation and he
is absolved from its liability.
59. It is the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that if the Tribunal comes to the
conclusion that the respondent No.1 has violated the condition of the policy then direct the
respondent No.2 to pay the compensation since the petitioner is a third party and he cannot be
made to suffer due to the fault of the owner of the offending vehicle and same can be recovered by
the insurer from the owner. The learned counsel for the petitioner in support of his argument has
placed reliance upon the following decisions:
1. (2018) 3 Supreme Court Cases 208 between Pappu & Others Vs. Vinod Kumar
Lamba & Another wherein it is held that:
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, --Ss.149(2) 166 & 168 --- Defence of unauthorised driver
with invalid licence---Insurer succeeding in establishing its defence--Consequence of
-
Held, owner of vehicle had produced insurance certificate indicating that vehicle was
comprehensively insured by insurance company for unlimited liability---Applying Swaran Singh,
(2004) 3 SCC 297, to subserve ends of justice, insurer directed to pay claim amount awarded by
Tribunal to claimants in first instance, with liberty to recover the same from owner of the vehicle in
accordance with law.
2. 2018 AIAR (Civil) 805 between Shamanna and another Appellants Vs. The Divisional Manager
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd., and Ors. Respondents wherein it is held that:
"Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, Sec.166 - Claim for compensation arising from motor
vehicle accident - Accident claim tribunal passing an award for compensation in
favour of the claimants and directing the insurer of the offending motor cycle to pay
the awarded compensation amount to the claimants in the first instance and then
recover the same from the insured/the owner of the offending motor cycles -
Judgment of the High Court, though enhancing the amount of the award yet
 14

Sunil Shreesail Killiket vs Subbraya on 18 July, 2024
reversing the same for "pay and recover"
holding that the owner of vehicle is not liable to pay the compensation to the claimants - Held not
sustainable and set aside and the insurance company directed to pay the enhanced compensation
along with accrued interest and recover the same from the owner of the vehicle."
60. Per contra, it is the argument of the learned counsel for the respondent No.2 that since the
respondent No.1 has breached the fundamental and statutory conditions of the policy, the
respondent No.2 is not liable to pay the compensation and the theory of pay and recovery does not
apply to the case on hand as owner himself committed breach of policy condition.
61. In this case it is admitted fact that the offending vehicle is covered with valid insurance at the
time of alleged accident. It is no doubt, in the case on hand, the respondent No.2 insurance company
has proved its defense in accordance with provision of Sec.149(2) and as such insurance company is
not liable to pay the compensation since the respondent No.1 has violated the condition of the
policy, which is fundamental breach. But, on the said ground, the petitioner is third party, cannot be
made to suffer due to fault of owner when the vehicle is covered with insurance at relevant point of
time. By placing reliance upon the principle laid down in the Amrit Paul Singh & Anr. Vs. TATA AIG
General Insurance Company Ltd. & Ors. ( 2018 SAR (Civil) 768)'s Case; Shamanna and another Vs.
The Divisional Manager Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd., and Ors.' and Papu & Others V/s Vinod Kumar
Lamba & Another's case referred supra and in view of aforesaid discussion it is proper to direct the
respondent No.2 to pay the compensation by reserving liberty to recover the same from the
respondent No.1, owner of the offending vehicle in the manner provided under law.
62. So far as interest on compensation is concerned, this tribunal likes to place reliance upon the
decision of the Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka in M.F.A. 13390/2014 clubbed with M.F.A.
25107/2013 dated 07.03.2018, between Vijay Ishwar Jadhav and others Vs. the Divisional Manager,
the Bajaj Allianz General Insurance Co. Ltd., wherein the Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka has
elaborately discussed with regard to the rate of interest to be awarded in the case arising out of the
accident, wherein at para No.15 it is held that "However, the provisions of Section 149 (1) of the Act
to the extent they speak of interest payable on the compensation amount is in the nature of an
exception to the general law enacted in Section 169 of the M.V. Act and therefore, the provisions of
Section 34 of C.P.C. to that extent become invocable on the general principles of construction of
statutes namely the special law over rides the general law. Therefore, in the absence of any other law
relating to interest on judgments, the MACT has to follow the provisions of Section 34 of C.P.C.,
1908. Thus, in the given circumstances of this case, interest at the rate of more than 6% could not
have been awarded." By relying upon the Vijay Ishwar Jadhav' case referred supra, this tribunal is of
the opinion that it is just and proper to award interest at the rate of 6% per annum on sum of
Rs.68,21,500/- from the date of the petition till its realization. It is made clear that the petitioner is
not entitled interest on sum of Rs.17,28,000/- which is awarded under the head of attendant
charges and Rs.2,00,000/- which is awarded under the head of future medical expenses. In view of
aforesaid discussion, the issue No.2 is answered accordingly.
Issue No.3:
 15

Sunil Shreesail Killiket vs Subbraya on 18 July, 2024
63. In view of findings on issue No.1 and 2, this tribunal proceeds to pass the following:
ORDER Petition filed by the petitioner U/s 166 of Indian Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 is
allowed in part with costs.
Petitioner is entitled for compensation of Rs.87,49,500/- (Rupees Eighty Seven Lakh
Forty Nine Thousand & Five Hundred only) from the respondent No.1.
The petitioner is entitled to interest on sum of Rs.68,21,500/- (Rupees Sixty Eight
Lakh Twenty One Thousand and Five Hundred only) at the rate of 6% per annum
from the date of petition till realization of the said amount, but petitioner is not
entitled to interest on sum of Rs.19,28,000/- (Rupees Nineteen Lakh Twenty Eight
Thousand only).
Respondent No.1 is liable to pay the award amount. The respondent No.2 is not liable to indemnify
the respondent No.1.
However, under the principle of 'Pay and Recovery' the respondent No.2 is directed to pay the award
amount with accrued interest thereon to the petitioner within 60 days from the date of this order by
reserving liberty to the respondent No.2 to recover the same from the respondent No.1 in
accordance with law.
Out of the amount so awarded to the petitioner, 60% with proportionate interest is ordered to be
deposited in the name of petitioner in any of the nationalized or schedule bank of choice of the
petitioner initially for a period of 5 years subject to auto renewal till further Order of the Tribunal
subject to withdrawing periodical interest from time to time by the petitioner and remaining
amount with proportionate interest is ordered to be credited to the account of the petitioner through
e-payment.
Advocate fee is fixed at Rs.2,000/-.
Draw award accordingly.
(Dictated to the stenographer directly on computer, corrected by me and then pronounced in open
court on this the 18th day of July 2024).
(LAVANYA H.N.) III ADDL.SMALL CAUSES JUDGE, MEMBER, MACT & ACJM, BANGALORE.
ANNEXURE List of witnesses examined on petitioners' side:
PW1 : Sunil Shreesail Killiket;
PW2 : Manju Ram Shillikshathri;
PW3 : Dr.Shailesh A.V.Rao.
 16

Sunil Shreesail Killiket vs Subbraya on 18 July, 2024
List of documents exhibited on petitioners' side:
Ex.P1 : True copy of FIR;
Ex.P2 : True copy of FIS;
Ex.P3 : True copy of Spot mahazar;
Ex.P4 : True copy of IMV report;
Ex.P5 : True copy of Wound certificate;
Ex.P6 : True copy of Sketch;
Ex.P7 : True copy of Charge sheet;
Ex.P8 : Discharge summaries;
Ex.P9 : Noarised copy of Aadhar card;
Ex.P10 : Notarised copy of disability
certificate;
Ex.P11 : Medical bills;
Ex.P12 : Partnership agreement;
Ex.P13 : Invoice bills;
Ex.P14 : Letter pertaining to
physiotherapy;
Ex.P15 : Notarised copy of Aadhar card;
Ex.P16 : X-rays;
Ex.P17 : Outpatient report;
Ex.P18 : Consultation report;
Ex.P19 : Medical bills;
Ex.P20 : Medical bills;
Ex.P21 : IT returns;
Ex.P22 : 65 B Certificate;
Ex.P23 : X-ray report;
Ex.P24 : OPD record;
Ex.P25 : Digital x-ray.
List of witnesses examined on respondents' side:
RW1 : Ruchitha Runukesh.
List of documents exhibited on respondents' side:
Ex.R1 : Authorisation letter;
Ex.R2 : Policy copy;
Ex.R3 : Notice sent to respondent No.1;
Ex.R4 : Postal acknowledgment.
III ADDL.SMALL CAUSES JUDGE,
MEMBER, MACT & ACJM,
BANGALURU.
 17