Reserved On: 21.07.2025 vs State Of H.P on 30 July, 2025
Reserved On: 21.07.2025 vs State Of H.P on 30 July, 2025
2025:HHC:25012 IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA Cr. Revision No. 59
of 2013 Reserved on: 21.07.2025 .
Date of Decision :30.7.2025.
Chaina Ram ...Petitioner
Versus
State of H.P. ...Respondent
Coram
Hon'ble Mr Justice Rakesh Kainthla, Judge. Whether approved for reporting?1 Yes For the
Petitioner : Mr. Ashish Verma, Advocate.
For the Respondent : Mr. Jitender K. Sharma, Advocate.
Rakesh Kainthla, Judge The present revision is directed against the judgment dated 29.12.2012,
passed by learned Additional Sessions Judge-I, Kangra at Dharamshala, District Kangra, H.P.
(learned Appellate Court), vide which the judgment of conviction and order of sentence dated
02.05.2008 passed by learned Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Palampur, District Kangra, H.P.,
(learned Trial Court) were upheld. (Parties shall hereinafter be referred to in the same Whether
reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment? Yes.
2025:HHC:25012 manner as they were arrayed before the learned Trial Court for convenience.) .
2. Briefly stated, the facts giving rise to the present revision are that the police presented a challan
before the learned Trial Court for the commission of offences punishable under Section 279, 337 and
338 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Section 181 of the Motor Vehicles Act (M.V. Act). It was
asserted that the informant Subhash Chand (PW-1) and his son Akshay Kumar (PW-2) were going
to Beed on 11.03.2003. They were waiting for a bus at the old bus stand in Palampur. A bus bearing
registration No. HP53-2713 came to the bus stand.
Akashay Kumar was boarding the bus when the driver suddenly started it. Akshay fell, and his left
leg was crushed under the rear tyre of the bus. The accused Chaina Ram was driving the bus.
 1

Reserved On: 21.07.2025 vs State Of H.P on 30 July, 2025
The accident occurred due to the negligence of the accused, who was attempting to overtake another
bus. An intimation was given to the police. The police recorded an entry in the daily diary and sent
Onkar Singh (PW-10), Gurbachan and HHC Ram Rattan to the Sub Divisional Hospital, Palampur,
to verify its correctness. The informant made a statement (PW-1/A), which was sent to the Police
Station, where F.I.R. (Ext.PW-8/A) was 2025:HHC:25012 registered. The photographs of the spot
(Ext.PA1 to Ext.PA12) were taken. Onkar Singh (PW-10) conducted the investigation.
.
He prepared the site plan (Ext.PW-10/A). He seized the bus along with the documents vide seizure
Memo (Ext.PW-6/A).
The mechanical examination of the bus was conducted by Kuldeep Singh (PW-7), who found that
there was no mechanical defect in the vehicle which could have led to the accident. He issued his
report (Ext.PW-7/A). Dr. Vinay Mahajan (PW-3) conducted the medical examination of Akshay
Kumar (PW-2) and found that he had sustained simple and grievous injuries, which could have been
caused in a motor vehicle accident. He issued MLC (Ext.PW3/A) and final opinion (Ext.PW-3/B).
Statements of witnesses were recorded as per their version, and after completion of the
investigation, the challan was prepared and presented before the learned Trial Court.
3. Learned Trial Court found sufficient reasons to summon the accused, and when the accused
appeared, a notice of accusation was put to him for the commission of offences punishable under
Sections 279, 337 and 338 of IPC and Section 181 of M.V. Act, to which he pleaded not guilty and
claimed to be tried.
2025:HHC:25012
4. The prosecution examined 10 witnesses to prove its case. Subhash Chand (PW-1) is the informant.
Akshay Kumar .
(PW-2) is the victim. Dr. Vinay Mahajan (PW-3) conducted the medical examination of the injured
Akshay Kumar. Constable Suresh Kumar (PW-4) and Kamlesh Dutt (PW-9) are the eyewitnesses.
Surjeet Guleria (PW-5) took the photographs.
Ravinder Kumar (PW-6) is the witness to the recovery of the bus.
Kuldeep Singh (PW-7) conducted the mechanical examination of the bus. HC. Kehar Singh (PW-8)
recorded the F.I.R. S.I. Onkar Singh (PW-10) investigated the case.
5. The accused, in his statement recorded under Section 313 of Cr.P.C., admitted that he was driving
the bus and that Akshay Kumar had sustained injuries in the motor vehicle accident. He stated that
he was innocent and a false case was made against him. He did not produce any defence evidence.
 2

Reserved On: 21.07.2025 vs State Of H.P on 30 July, 2025
6. Learned Trial Court held that the testimonies of the eyewitnesses corroborated each other. It was
duly proved on record that Akshay Kumar was boarding the bus, and the accused suddenly started
the bus. Akshay Kumar fell and sustained injuries. His negligence led to the accident. The accused
failed to 2025:HHC:25012 produce a driving license. Hence, the accused was convicted and
sentenced as under: -
.
Offences Sentences
279 of IPC Convict was sentenced to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for three months and pay a fine of (cid:128)1000/- and in default of payment
of fine to undergo further simple imprisonment for one month.
337 of IPC Convict was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three
months and pay a fine of (cid:128)500/- and in default of payment of fine to undergo further
simple imprisonment for fifteen days.
338 of IPC Convict was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for six months
and pay a fine of (cid:128)1000/- and in default of payment of fine to undergo further simple
imprisonment for one month.
181 of M.V. Convict was sentence to pay a fine of (cid:128)500/- and Act default of payment
of fine to undergo further simple imprisonment for seven days.
All the sentences were ordered to run concurrently.
7. Being aggrieved by the judgment and order passed by the learned Trial Court, the accused filed an
appeal, which was decided by the learned Additional Sessions Judge-I, Kangra at Dharamshala,
District Kangra, H.P. (learned Appellate Court).
Learned Appellate Court concurred with the findings recorded by the learned trial Court that Akshay
Kumar (PW-2) was trying to board the bus when the accused started it. The accused failed to
2025:HHC:25012 take due care and reasonable precaution, which led to the accident. The accused
failed to produce a driving license. Hence, .
he was rightly convicted by the learned Trial Court. The sentence was adequate. No interference was
required with it.
 3

Reserved On: 21.07.2025 vs State Of H.P on 30 July, 2025
Hence, the appeal was dismissed.
8. Being aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgments and order passed by the learned Courts
below, the accused has filed the present revision petition, asserting that the learned Courts below
misinterpreted the evidence. The statements of witnesses contradicted each other. Akshay Kumar
(PW-2) admitted that he had tried to board a running bus; therefore, he was negligent. The accused
had produced a driving license before the learned Appellate Court. However, the learned Appellate
Court failed to notice it and wrongly affirmed the conviction of the accused for the commission of an
offence punishable under Section 181 of the M.V. Act. Therefore, it was prayed that the present
petition be allowed and the judgments and order passed by the learned Courts below be set aside.
2025:HHC:25012
9. I have heard Mr. Ashish Verma, learned counsel for the petitioner/accused and Mr. Jitender
Sharma, learned .
Additional Advocate General, for the respondent/State.
10. Mr. Ashish Verma, learned counsel for the petitioner/accused, submitted that the learned Courts
below erred in convicting and sentencing the accused. The prosecution evidence proved that Akshay
Kumar was trying to board a moving vehicle, and he was negligent. There was no negligence on the
part of the accused, hence, he prayed that the present revision be allowed and the judgments and
order passed by the learned Courts below be set aside. He submitted in the alternative that the
incident occurred in the year 2003, and 22 years have elapsed since the incident; therefore, a lenient
view be taken and the sentence of imprisonment awarded by the learned Courts below be set aside.
11. Mr. Jitender Sharma, learned Additional Advocate General for the respondent/State submitted
that the accused was driving the bus without a valid driving license, which amounted to negligence.
He failed to stop the bus and started it when the passengers were boarding the bus. His negligence
led to the 2025:HHC:25012 accident; therefore, he prayed that the present revision petition be
dismissed.
.
12. I have given considerable thought to the submissions made at the bar and have gone through the
records carefully.
13. It was laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Malkeet Singh Gill v. State of Chhattisgarh,
(2022) 8 SCC 204:
(2022) 3 SCC (Cri) 348: 2022 SCC OnLine SC 786 that the revisional court does not
exercise an appellate jurisdiction and it can only rectify the patent defect, errors of
jurisdiction or the law. It was observed at page 207: -
 4

Reserved On: 21.07.2025 vs State Of H.P on 30 July, 2025
"10. Before adverting to the merits of the contentions, at the outset, it is apt to
mention that there are concurrent findings of conviction arrived at by two courts
after a detailed appreciation of the material and evidence brought on record. The
High Court in criminal revision against conviction is not supposed to exercise the
jurisdiction like the appellate court, and the scope of interference in revision is
extremely narrow. Section 397 of the Criminal Procedure Code (in short "CrPC")
vests jurisdiction to satisfy itself or himself as to the correctness, legality, or propriety
of any finding, sentence, or order, recorded or passed, and as to the regularity of any
proceedings of such inferior court. The object of the provision is to set right a patent
defect or an error of jurisdiction or law. There has to be a well-founded error which is
to be determined on the merits of individual cases. It is also well settled that while
considering the same, the Revisional Court does not dwell at length upon the facts
and evidence of the case to reverse those findings.
2025:HHC:25012
14. This position was reiterated in State of Gujarat v.
Dilipsinh Kishorsinh Rao, (2023) 17 SCC 688: 2023 SCC OnLine SC .
1294, wherein it was observed at page 695:
14. The power and jurisdiction of the Higher Court under Section 397CrPC, which
vests the court with the power to call for and examine records of an inferior court, is
for the purposes of satisfying itself as to the legality and regularities of any
proceeding or order made in a case. The object of this provision is to set right a
patent defect or an error of jurisdiction or law or the perversity which has crept in
such proceedings.
15. It would be apposite to refer to the judgment of this Court in Amit Kapoor v.
Ramesh Chander [Amit Kapoor v. Ramesh Chander, (2012) 9 SCC 460: (2012) 4 SCC
(Civ) 687: (2013) 1 SCC (Cri) 986], where scope of Section 397 has been considered
and succinctly explained as under: (SCC p. 475, paras 12-13) "12. Section 397 of the
Code vests the court with the power to call for and examine the records of an inferior
court for the purposes of satisfying itself as to the legality and regularity of any
proceedings or order made in a case. The object of this provision is to set right a
patent defect or an error of jurisdiction or law.
There has to be a well-founded error, and it may not be appropriate for the court to scrutinise the
orders, which, upon the face of it, bear a token of careful consideration and appear to be in
accordance with law. If one looks into the various judgments of this Court, it emerges that the
revisional jurisdiction can be invoked where the decisions under challenge are grossly erroneous,
there is no compliance with the provisions of law, the finding recorded is based on no evidence,
material evidence is ignored, or judicial discretion is exercised arbitrarily or perversely. These are
 5

Reserved On: 21.07.2025 vs State Of H.P on 30 July, 2025
not 2025:HHC:25012 exhaustive classes, but are merely indicative. Each case would have to be
determined on its own merits.
13. Another well-accepted norm is that the revisional jurisdiction of the higher court is a very limited
one and .
cannot be exercised in a routine manner. One of the inbuilt restrictions is that it should not be
against an interim or interlocutory order. The Court has to keep in mind that the exercise of
revisional jurisdiction itself should not lead to injustice ex facie. Where the Court is dealing with the
question as to whether the charge has been framed properly and in accordance with law in a given
case, it may be reluctant to interfere in the exercise of its revisional jurisdiction unless the case
substantially falls within the categories aforestated. Even framing of charge is a much-advanced
stage in the proceedings under CrPC."
16. This Court in the aforesaid judgment in Amit Kapoor case [Amit Kapoor v. Ramesh Chander,
(2012) 9 SCC 460 :
(2012) 4 SCC (Civ) 687 : (2013) 1 SCC (Cri) 986] has also laid down principles to be
considered for exercise of jurisdiction under Section 397 particularly in the context of
prayer for quashing of charge framed under Section 228CrPC is sought for as under :
(Amit Kapoor case [Amit Kapoor v. Ramesh Chander, (2012) 9 SCC 460 : (2012) 4
SCC (Civ) 687 : (2013) 1 SCC (Cri) 986], SCC pp. 482-83, para 27) "27. Having
discussed the scope of jurisdiction under these two provisions, i.e., Section 397 and
Section 482 of the Code, and the fine line of jurisdictional distinction, it will now be
appropriate for us to enlist the principles with reference to which the courts should
exercise such jurisdiction. However, it is not only difficult but inherently impossible
to state such principles with precision. At best and upon objective analysis of various
judgments of this Court, we are able to cull out some of the principles to be
considered for proper exercise of jurisdiction, particularly, with regard to quashing of
charge either in exercise of 2025:HHC:25012 jurisdiction under Section 397 or
Section 482 of the Code or together, as the case may be:
27.1. Though there are no limits to the powers of the Court under Section 482 of the
Code but the more the .
power, the more due care and caution is to be exercised in invoking these powers. The power of
quashing criminal proceedings, particularly the charge framed in terms of Section 228 of the Code,
should be exercised very sparingly and with circumspection, and that too in the rarest of rare cases.
27.2. The Court should apply the test as to whether the uncontroverted allegations as made from the
record of the case and the documents submitted therewith prima facie establish the offence or not. If
the allegations are so patently absurd and inherently improbable that no prudent person can ever
reach such a conclusion, and where the basic ingredients of a criminal offence are not satisfied, then
the Court may interfere. 27.3. The High Court should not unduly interfere. No meticulous
 6

Reserved On: 21.07.2025 vs State Of H.P on 30 July, 2025
examination of the evidence is needed for considering whether the case would end in conviction or
not at the stage of framing of charge or quashing of charge.
*** 27.9. Another very significant caution that the courts have to observe is that it cannot examine
the facts, evidence and materials on record to determine whether there is sufficient material on the
basis of which the case would end in a conviction; the court is concerned primarily with the
allegations taken as a whole whether they will constitute an offence and, if so, is it an abuse of the
process of court leading to injustice.
*** 27.13. Quashing of a charge is an exception to the rule of continuous prosecution. Where the
offence is even broadly satisfied, the Court should be more inclined to 2025:HHC:25012 permit
continuation of prosecution rather than its quashing at that initial stage. The Court is not expected
to marshal the records with a view to decide admissibility and reliability of the documents or .
records, but it is an opinion formed prima facie."
17. The revisional court cannot sit as an appellate court and start appreciating the evidence by
finding out inconsistencies in the statements of witnesses, and it is not legally permissible. The High
Courts ought to be cognizant of the fact that the trial court was dealing with an application for
discharge.
15. This position was reiterated in State of Gujarat v.
Dilipsinh Kishorsinh Rao, (2023) 17 SCC 688: 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1294, wherein it was observed
at page 695:
14. The power and jurisdiction of the Higher Court under Section 397CrPC, which
vests the court with the power to call for and examine records of an inferior court, is
for the purposes of satisfying itself as to the legality and regularities of any
proceeding or order made in a case. The object of this provision is to set right a
patent defect or an error of jurisdiction or law or the perversity which has crept in
such proceedings.
15. It would be apposite to refer to the judgment of this Court in Amit Kapoor v.
Ramesh Chander [Amit Kapoor v. Ramesh Chander, (2012) 9 SCC 460: (2012) 4 SCC
(Civ) 687: (2013) 1 SCC (Cri) 986], where scope of Section 397 has been considered
and succinctly explained as under: (SCC p. 475, paras 12-13) "12. Section 397 of the
Code vests the court with the power to call for and examine the records of an inferior
court for the purposes of satisfying itself as to the legality and regularity of any
proceedings or order made in a case. The object of this provision is to set right a
patent defect or an error of jurisdiction or law.
2025:HHC:25012 There has to be a well-founded error, and it may not be appropriate for the court
to scrutinise the orders, which, upon the face of it, bear a token of careful consideration and appear
 7

Reserved On: 21.07.2025 vs State Of H.P on 30 July, 2025
to be in accordance with law.
.
If one looks into the various judgments of this Court, it emerges that the revisional jurisdiction can
be invoked where the decisions under challenge are grossly erroneous, there is no compliance with
the provisions of law, the finding recorded is based on no evidence, material evidence is ignored, or
judicial discretion is exercised arbitrarily or perversely. These are not exhaustive classes, but are
merely indicative. Each case would have to be determined on its own merits.
13. Another well-accepted norm is that the revisional jurisdiction of the higher court is a very limited
one and cannot be exercised in a routine manner. One of the inbuilt restrictions is that it should not
be against an interim or interlocutory order. The Court has to keep in mind that the exercise of
revisional jurisdiction itself should not lead to injustice ex facie. Where the Court is dealing with the
question as to whether the charge has been framed properly and in accordance with law in a given
case, it may be reluctant to interfere in the exercise of its revisional jurisdiction unless the case
substantially falls within the categories aforestated. Even framing of charge is a much-advanced
stage in the proceedings under CrPC."
16. This Court in the aforesaid judgment in Amit Kapoor case [Amit Kapoor v. Ramesh Chander,
(2012) 9 SCC 460 :
(2012) 4 SCC (Civ) 687 : (2013) 1 SCC (Cri) 986] has also laid down principles to be
considered for exercise of jurisdiction under Section 397 particularly in the context of
prayer for quashing of charge framed under Section 228CrPC is sought for as under :
(Amit Kapoor case [Amit Kapoor v. Ramesh Chander, (2012) 9 SCC 460 : (2012) 4
SCC (Civ) 687 : (2013) 1 SCC (Cri) 986], SCC pp. 482-83, para 27) "27. Having
discussed the scope of jurisdiction under these two provisions, i.e. Section 397 and
Section 482 2025:HHC:25012 of the Code, and the fine line of jurisdictional
distinction, it will now be appropriate for us to enlist the principles with reference to
which the courts should exercise such jurisdiction. However, it is not .
only difficult but inherently impossible to state such principles with precision. At best and upon
objective analysis of various judgments of this Court, we are able to cull out some of the principles to
be considered for proper exercise of jurisdiction, particularly, with regard to quashing of charge
either in exercise of jurisdiction under Section 397 or Section 482 of the Code or together, as the
case may be:
27.1. Though there are no limits to the powers of the Court under Section 482 of the
Code but the more the power, the more due care and caution is to be exercised in
invoking these powers. The power of quashing criminal proceedings, particularly, the
charge framed in terms of Section 228 of the Code, should be exercised very sparingly
and with circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases.
 8

Reserved On: 21.07.2025 vs State Of H.P on 30 July, 2025
27.2. The Court should apply the test as to whether the uncontroverted allegations as
made from the record of the case and the documents submitted therewith prima facie
establish the offence or not. If the allegations are so patently absurd and inherently
improbable that no prudent person can ever reach such a conclusion, and where the
basic ingredients of a criminal offence are not satisfied, then the Court may interfere.
27.3. The High Court should not unduly interfere. No meticulous examination of the
evidence is needed for considering whether the case would end in conviction or not at
the stage of framing of charge or quashing of charge.
*** 27.9. Another very significant caution that the courts have to observe is that it
cannot examine the facts, evidence and materials on record to determine whether
2025:HHC:25012 there is sufficient material on the basis of which the case would
end in a conviction; the court is concerned primarily with the allegations taken as a
whole whether they will constitute an offence and, if so, is it an abuse .
of the process of court leading to injustice.
*** 27.13. Quashing of a charge is an exception to the rule of continuous prosecution. Where the
offence is even broadly satisfied, the Court should be more inclined to permit continuation of
prosecution rather than its quashing at that initial stage. The Court is not expected to marshal the
records with a view to decide admissibility and reliability of the documents or records, but it is an
opinion formed prima facie."
17. The revisional court cannot sit as an appellate court and start appreciating the evidence by
finding out inconsistencies in the statements of witnesses, and it is not legally permissible. The High
Courts ought to be cognizant of the fact that the trial court was dealing with an application for
discharge.
16. It was held in Kishan Rao v. Shankargouda, (2018) 8 SCC 165: (2018) 3 SCC (Cri) 544: (2018) 4
SCC (Civ) 37: 2018 SCC OnLine SC 651 that it is impermissible for the High Court to reappreciate
the evidence and come to its conclusions in the absence of any perversity. It was observed at page
169:
"12. This Court has time and again examined the scope of Sections 397/401 CrPC and
the grounds for exercising the revisional jurisdiction by the High Court. In State of
Kerala v. Puttumana Illath Jathavedan Namboodiri [State of Kerala v. Puttumana
Illath Jathavedan Namboodiri, (1999) 2 SCC 452: 1999 SCC (Cri) 275], while
considering the scope of the revisional jurisdiction of the High Court, this Court has
laid down the following: (SCC pp. 454-55, para 5) 2025:HHC:25012 "5. ... In its
revisional jurisdiction, the High Court can call for and examine the record of any
proceedings to satisfy itself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of any finding,
sentence or order. In other words, the .
 9

Reserved On: 21.07.2025 vs State Of H.P on 30 July, 2025
jurisdiction is one of supervisory jurisdiction exercised by the High Court for
correcting a miscarriage of justice. But the said revisional power cannot be equated
with the power of an appellate court, nor can it be treated even as a second appellate
jurisdiction. Ordinarily, therefore, it would not be appropriate for the High Court to
reappreciate the evidence and come to its conclusion on the same when the evidence
has already been appreciated by the Magistrate as well as the Sessions Judge in
appeal unless any glaring feature is brought to the notice of the High Court which
would otherwise tantamount to a gross miscarriage of justice.
On scrutinising the impugned judgment of the High Court from the aforesaid
standpoint, we have no hesitation in concluding that the High Court exceeded its
jurisdiction in interfering with the conviction of the respondent by reappreciating the
oral evidence. ..."
13. Another judgment which has also been referred to and relied on by the High Court is the
judgment of this Court in Sanjaysinh Ramrao Chavan v. Dattatray Gulabrao Phalke [Sanjaysinh
Ramrao Chavan v. Dattatray Gulabrao Phalke, (2015) 3 SCC 123: (2015) 2 SCC (Cri) 19]. This Court
held that the High Court, in the exercise of revisional jurisdiction, shall not interfere with the order
of the Magistrate unless it is perverse or wholly unreasonable or there is non-consideration of any
relevant material, the order cannot be set aside merely on the ground that another view is possible.
The following has been laid down in para 14: (SCC p. 135) "14. ... Unless the order passed by the
Magistrate is perverse or the view taken by the court is wholly unreasonable or there is
non-consideration of any relevant material or there is palpable misreading of records, the Revisional
Court is not justified in setting 2025:HHC:25012 aside the order, merely because another view is
possible. The Revisional Court is not meant to act as an appellate court. The whole purpose of the
revisional jurisdiction is to preserve the power of the court to do .
justice in accordance with the principles of criminal jurisprudence. The revisional power of the court
under Sections 397 to 401 CrPC is not to be equated with that of an appeal. Unless the finding of the
court, whose decision is sought to be revised, is shown to be perverse or untenable in law or is
grossly erroneous or glaringly unreasonable or where the decision is based on no material or where
the material facts are wholly ignored or where the judicial discretion is exercised arbitrarily or
capriciously, the courts may not interfere with the decision in exercise of their revisional
jurisdiction."
14. In the above case, the conviction of the accused was also recorded, and the High Court set aside
[Dattatray Gulabrao Phalke v. Sanjaysinh Ramrao Chavan, 2013 SCC OnLine Bom 1753] the order of
conviction by substituting its view. This Court set aside the High Court's order holding that the High
Court exceeded its jurisdiction in substituting its views, and that too without any legal basis.
17. This position was reiterated in Bir Singh v. Mukesh Kumar, (2019) 4 SCC 197: (2019) 2 SCC (Cri)
40: (2019) 2 SCC (Civ) 309: 2019 SCC OnLine SC 13, wherein it was observed at page 205:
 10

Reserved On: 21.07.2025 vs State Of H.P on 30 July, 2025
"16. It is well settled that in the exercise of revisional jurisdiction under Section 482
of the Criminal Procedure Code, the High Court does not, in the absence of
perversity, upset concurrent factual findings. It is not for the Revisional Court to
re-analyse and re-interpret the evidence on record.
17. As held by this Court in Southern Sales & Services v. Sauermilch Design and
Handels GmbH [Southern Sales & Services v. Sauermilch Design and Handels
GmbH, 2025:HHC:25012 (2008) 14 SCC 457], it is a well-established principle of law
that the Revisional Court will not interfere even if a wrong order is passed by a court
having jurisdiction, in the absence of a jurisdictional error. The answer to the first .
question is, therefore, in the negative."
18. The present revision has to be decided as per the parameters laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court.
19. It was a specific case of the prosecution that Akshay Kumar was boarding the bus when the
accused started the bus. It was laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Mohd. Aynuddin v. State
of A.P., (2000) 7 SCC 72, that a person can fall from a moving vehicle due to the accident, negligence
of the passenger, or negligent taking off the bus by the driver. A driver can be expected to keep his
eyes ahead and possibly on the side. A presumption of negligence cannot be drawn against the
driver if the person falls off the moving bus. It was observed:-
"5. What is the culpable negligence on the part of the bus driver in the above
accident? A passenger might fall from a moving vehicle due to one of the following
causes: it could be accidental; it could be due to the negligence of the passenger
himself; it could be due to the negligent taking-off of the bus by the driver. However,
to fasten the liability with the driver for negligent driving in such a situation, there
should be evidence that he moved the bus suddenly before the passenger could get
into the vehicle or that the driver moved the vehicle even before getting any signal
from the rear side.
2025:HHC:25012
6. A driver who moves the bus forward can be expected to keep his eyes ahead and
possibly on the sides. A driver can take the reverse motion when that driver assures
himself that the vehicle can safely be taken backwards.
.
7. It is a wrong proposition that for any motor accident, negligence of the driver
should be presumed. An accident of such a nature as would prima facie show that it
cannot be accounted for anything other than the negligence of the driver of the
vehicle may create a presumption, and in such a case, the driver has to explain how
 11

Reserved On: 21.07.2025 vs State Of H.P on 30 July, 2025
the accident happened without negligence on his part. Merely because a passenger
fell from the bus while boarding the bus, no presumption of negligence can be drawn
against the driver of the bus.
8. The principle of res ipsa loquitur is only a rule of evidence to determine the onus of
proof in actions relating to negligence. The said principle has application only when
the nature of the accident and the attending circumstances would reasonably lead to
the belief that, in the absence of negligence, the accident would not have occurred
and that the thing that caused the injury is shown to have been under the
management and control of the alleged wrongdoer.
9. A rash act is primarily an overhasty act. It is opposed to a deliberate act. Still, a
rash act can be a deliberate act in the sense that it was done without due care and
caution.
Culpable rashness lies in running the risk of doing an act with recklessness and
indifference as to the consequences. Criminal negligence is the failure to exercise
duty with reasonable and proper care and precaution, guarding against injury to the
public generally or to any individual in particular. It is the imperative duty of the
driver of a vehicle to adopt such reasonable and proper care and precaution.
10. In the present case, the possible explanation of the driver is that he was unaware
of even the possibility of the accident which happened. It could be so. When he
moved 2025:HHC:25012 the vehicle forward, his focus normally would have been
towards what was ahead of the vehicle. He is not expected to move the vehicle
forward when passengers are in the process of boarding the vehicle. But when he gets
a signal .
from the conductor that the bus can proceed, he is expected to start moving the
vehicle. Here, no witness has said, including the conductor, that the driver moved the
vehicle before getting a signal to move forward. The evidence in this case is too scanty
to fasten him with criminal negligence. Some further evidence is indispensably
needed to presume that the passenger fell down due to the negligence of the driver of
the bus. Such further evidence is lacking in this case. Therefore, the Court is disabled
from concluding that the victim fell down only because of the negligent driving of the
bus. The corollary thereof is that the conviction of the appellant of the offence is
unsustainable."
20. Subhash Chand (PW-1) stated that the bus conductor was standing at the door when the
passengers were trying to board the bus.
The accused started the bus. Akshay Kumar (PW-2) also stated that he was boarding the bus from
the front door when the driver started the bus, and he fell. Constable Suresh Kumar (PW-4) stated
that one boy, Akshay, was boarding the bus. The driver started the bus, and Akshay fell. Kamlesh
 12

Reserved On: 21.07.2025 vs State Of H.P on 30 July, 2025
Dutt (PW-9) stated that passengers were boarding the bus. One boy was pushed by the passengers,
and he fell. The bus was moving slowly at that time.
21. Thus, it is apparent that no witness has stated that the accused started the bus without getting
the signal from the conductor.
2025:HHC:25012
22. Kamlesh Dutt (PW-9) stated that the passenger, Akshay Kumar, was pushed by other
passengers. It is admitted .
by all the witnesses that there was a huge rush of passengers at the bus stand. Therefore, the
explanation provided by Kamlesh Dutt (PW-9) that Akshay fell because he was pushed by other
passengers cannot be ignored.
23. Akshay Kumar (PW-2) admitted in his cross-
examination that many persons were trying to board the bus, and they were pushing each other. He
also admitted that the bus had not reached the place from where passengers board the bus.
It was ten feet away from that place. He admitted that the bus was moving and had not come to a
halt. He volunteered to say that the bus had stopped. His cross-examination also makes it highly
probable that the passengers tried to board a moving bus, and Akshay Kumar was pushed by other
passengers.
24. Constable Suresh Kumar (PW-4) stated in his cross-
examination that he was controlling the traffic and his back was towards the bus. He could not say
with certainty whether the bus was moving or was stationary. He could not say whether the boy was
attempting to board the moving bus and was pushed by the 2025:HHC:25012 passengers. Hence,
the cross-examination of this witness also does not show that there was any negligence of the driver.
.
25. Subhash Chand (PW-1) admitted that the boy tried to board the bus to get a seat. He denied that
the bus was not parked and that Akshay Kumar was attempting to board the moving bus. However,
his testimony does not show that the accused was made aware of the fact that Akshay was
attempting to board the bus, and the accused moved the bus without getting the signal from the
conductor.
26. Learned Courts below proceeded on the basis that since the passenger had fallen, therefore, the
accused was negligent, which is not a correct proposition of law. The prosecution was required to
prove that the accused had moved the bus without getting the signal from the conductor, and
nobody asserted any such fact. Thus, learned Courts below erred in holding that the accused was
 13

Reserved On: 21.07.2025 vs State Of H.P on 30 July, 2025
negligent in driving the bus.
27. It was submitted that the accused did not have a valid driving license, and driving the bus
without a valid driving license itself amounts to negligence. This submission is not acceptable. It was
laid down in State Government v.
2025:HHC:25012 Bhawanesh Kumar, 1957 SCC OnLine MP 102, that absence of a driving licence
does not constitute rashness or negligence. It .
was observed:
"15. We are equally clear that from the mere fact that the accused-respondent did not
possess a driving licence, it cannot be positively inferred that he was guilty of
rashness or negligence in driving a heavy vehicle like a truck. There is evidence of
Jabbar (D. W. 1), which shows that the accused is in charge of the Sarodha Head
Workshop, and he has been testing and driving motor vehicles for 1½ years.
According to him, he is an experienced motor driver, and consequently, there is
nothing to show that in undertaking to drive a heavy motor vehicle like a truck, he
was undertaking a risk for which there was no justification whatsoever. Whether he
drives a vehicle with a licence or without a licence, the law expects him to be neither
rash nor negligent in the performance of his task, and we will judge his conduct in the
matter as if he were the most qualified driver who brings to his task the ordinary
reasonable competency of persons driving heavy motor vehicles."
28. This position was reiterated in Suleman Rehiman Mulani v.
State of Maharashtra, 1967 SCC OnLine SC 337 : (1968) 2 SCR 515: AIR 1968 SC 829, wherein it was
observed:
12....There is no presumption in law that a person who possesses only a learner's
licence or possesses no licence at all does not know driving. For various reasons, not
excluding sheer indifference, he might not have taken a regular licence. The
prosecution's evidence that Appellant 1 had driven the jeep to various places on the
day previous to the occurrence is proof of the fact that he knew driving. There was no
basis for the conclusion that it was a sheer stroke of good fortune that he did not meet
with any accident on that day.
xxxxx 2025:HHC:25012
14....In the present case, we do not know what was the proximate cause of the accident. We cannot
rule out the possibility of the accident having been caused due to the fault of the deceased. The
question whether Appellant 1 was proficient in driving a Jeep or .
 14

Reserved On: 21.07.2025 vs State Of H.P on 30 July, 2025
not does not conclude the issue. His proficiency in driving might furnish a defence, which a learner
could not have, but the absence of proficiency did not make him guilty. The only question was
whether, in point of fact, he was not competent to drive and his incompetence was the cause of the
death of the person concerned.
29. Hence, the accused cannot be held to be negligent merely because he did not possess any driving
licence.
30. It was submitted that the accused had a valid driving license, and it was produced before the
learned Appellate Court, and the learned Appellate Court failed to take notice of the same. This
submission is not correct. No application for additional evidence was filed before the learned
Appellate Court. The Memorandum of Appeal does not mention that any valid driving license was
annexed to the appeal. The list of documents only mentions the receipt of fine and the copy of the
judgment, and not a copy of the driving license; therefore, the submission that the accused had a
valid driving which he had produced before the learned Trial Court, is factually incorrect.
31. The accused was the best person to produce the driving licence because he was in possession of
the same. He failed to produce a driving license before the learned Trial Court, the learned Appellate
2025:HHC:25012 Court or before this Court. When the accused had failed to produce the driving
license, he was rightly convicted of the commission of an .
offence punishable under Section 181 of the M.V. Act for driving the bus without a valid license.
32. Thus, the learned Trial Court erred in holding that the accused was negligent in driving the bus
and his negligence led to the accident, causing injuries to Akshay Kumar. Learned Appellate Court
also erred in affirming the judgment of conviction and order passed by the learned Trial Court;
however, the learned Trial Court had rightly convicted the accused for the commission of an offence
punishable under Section 181 of the MV Act.
33. In view of above, the present appeal is partly allowed and judgment of conviction and order of
sentence passed by learned Trial Court convicting and sentencing the accused for the commissions
of offences punishable under Sections 279, 337, 338 of IPC as affirmed by the learned Appellate
Court are ordered to be set aside, whereas, the judgment of the learned Trial Court convicting the
accused for the commission of an offence punishable under Section 181 of M.V. Act and sentencing
him to pay fine as affirmed by the learned Appellate Court is ordered to be upheld.
2025:HHC:25012
34. In view of the above terms, the present petition stands disposed of, so also the pending
miscellaneous application(s), if any .
35. A copy of the judgment, along with records of the learned Courts below, be sent back forthwith.
 15

Reserved On: 21.07.2025 vs State Of H.P on 30 July, 2025
(Rakesh Kainthla)
Judge
30th July 2025
(Ravinder)
r to
 16