United India Insurance Company Limited vs V.Vijayakumar on 8 September, 2010
United India Insurance Company Limited vs V.Vijayakumar on 8
September, 2010
Author: R.Banumathi
Bench: R.Banumathi, G.M.Akbar Ali
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED: 08.09.2010
CORAM:
THE HONOURABLE MRS.JUSTICE R.BANUMATHI
AND
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE G.M.AKBAR ALI
C.M.A.No.3044 of 2005
United India Insurance Company Limited,
Salem. .... Appellant
Vs.
1. V.Vijayakumar
rep.by his mother Kalamani
2. V.Kalamani
3. C.Marimuthu
4. T.Rukmani ... Respondents
Prayer: Civil Miscellaneous Appeal fileSde cutnidoenr 173 of Motor Vehicles Act against the award and decree dated 29.11.2004 made in M.C.O.P.No.428 of 2003 on the file of Motor Accident Claims Tribunal (Principal Subordinate Judge), Coimbatore.
For Appellant : Mr.S.Arunkumar
For Respondents : Mr.K.Thilageswaran
for RR.1 and 2
R3 and R.4 (cid:22) exparte
 1

United India Insurance Company Limited vs V.Vijayakumar on 8 September, 2010
JUDGMENT
R.BANUMATHI,J.
This Appeal arises out of the award 29.11.2004 passed in M.C.O.P.No.428 of 2003 on the file of the
Motor Accident Claims Tribunal (Principal Subordinate Judge), Coimbatore awarding
compensation of Rs.19,59,895/- for the injuries sustained by the 1st Respondent/claimant.
2. The brief facts of the case are as follows:
On 7.7.2002, the 1st Respondent/Claimant was walking on the road opposite to
Annur Bus stand. At about 7.45 P.M, the 3rd Respondent drove the Tourist Maxi Cab
- Mahendra van bearing Registration No.TN 27 L 3638 from west to east in a rash
and negligent manner dashed against the claimant. Criminal case was registered
against the van driver in Crime No.292 of 2002 on the file of Annur Police Station.
After investigation, charge sheet was filed against the van driver/3rd respondent.
3. The claimant sustained severe head injuries, diffuse axonal injury on the corpus callosum,
subartical areas on both hemispheres. He was admitted in K.M.C.H.Hospital, Coimbatore in the
Intensive Care Unit and Neuro Ward upto 25.12.2002. Later he was shifted as referred case to
Chander Hospital at Tiruppur. The claimant is a B.Com graduate and at the time of accident he was
working as Accountant in a garment manufacturing unit and earning Rs.4,500/- per month.
Alleging that the accident was due to rash and negligent driving of 3rd Respondent, Claimant has
filed claim petition claiming compensation of Rs.25,00,000/-.
4. The owner and the driver of the van remained exparte. While admitting the existence of policy of
insurance, the Insurance Company resisted the Claim Petition by filing counter contending that on
the date of accident, the 3rd Respondent was not holding a valid and effective driving licence to
drive the Tourist Maxi Cab Mahendra van. It was further averred that the offending vehicle bearing
Regn.No.TN 27 L 3638 driven by the 3rd Respondent is a public service tourist maxi cab requiring
driver of the vehicle to be specifically authorised by way of badge as required by rules and
regulations. Further contention was that since the 3rd Respondent was not holding a badge, the
terms and conditions of the policy and the corresponding stipulations of the Motor Vehicles Act
have been violated by the owner-insurer, who had permitted the 3rd Respondent to drive the vehicle
and therefore no liability could be fastened on the Insurance Company and only owner and driver of
the vehicle are liable to pay the compensation.
5. In the trial Court, mother of the Claimant was examined as P.W.1. Eye witness Praveen was
examined as P.W.6. The doctors were examined as P.Ws.3 to 5. Easwaramurthy, owner of the
garment company and Dr.C.Venugopal (cid:22) Physiotherapist were examined as P.Ws.2 and 7 and
Exs.A.1 to A.14 were marked. On the side of Respondents, Motor Vehicles Inspector was examined
as R.W.1 and Assistant Administrative Officer in the Insurance Company was examined as R.W.2
and Exs.B.1 and B.2 were marked.
 2

United India Insurance Company Limited vs V.Vijayakumar on 8 September, 2010
6. Upon consideration of oral and documentary evidence, Tribunal held that there was no evidence
to show that the driver of the offending vehicle/ 3rd Respondent was not competent to drive the
tourist maxi cab. The Tribunal further held that even if there is violation of policy conditions the
Insurer cannot avoid liability unless there had been breach of policy conditions. The Tribunal
further held that the 3rd Respondent had LMV driving licence and there was no proof to show that
the 4th Respondent failed to take reasonable care and there was no fundamental breach of the policy
conditions and held that the Appellant Insurance Company is liable to pay the compensation.
Insofar as the quantum of compensation the Tribunal has taken the monthly income of the claimant
at Rs.4,500/- and the percentage of disability at 95 percent and awarded compensation of
Rs.19,59,895/- under the following heads:
Permanent disability : Rs. 8,20,800.00
Pain and suffering : Rs. 25,000.00
Mental agony : Rs. 75,000.00
Extra Nourishment : Rs. 1,000.00
Transportation : Rs. 1,000.00
Medical Expenses : Rs. 9,37,095.00
Loss of income : Rs. 1,00,000.00
------------------- Total : Rs.19,59,895.00
-------------------
7. Challenging the award passed by the Tribunal, both on liability as well as on quantum, the learned
counsel for Appellant Insurance Company Mr.Arunkumar contended that once the defence by the
insurer is established in the proceedings before the Tribunal, the Tribunal is bound to discharge the
insurer and fix the liability only on the owner/driver of the vehicle and while so the Tribunal erred
in saying that the Appellant liable to pay the compensation in spite of the fact that the 3rd
Respondent has no driving licence to drive the offending vehicle. It was further submitted that on
the evidence of R.Ws.1 and 2, and Exs.B.1 and B.2, the Tribunal ought to have held that 4th
Respondent has violated the policy conditions and held that the Appellant is not liable to pay the
compensation. In so far as the quantum, the learned counsel would submit that the quantum of
compensation awarded by the Tribunal is without any basis and excessive.
8. Learned counsel for the Respondents 1 and 2 submitted that the burden to prove the defence
raised by the insurers as regards the question as to whether there has been any breach or violation of
policy conditions of the insurance policy has been issued or not, would be upon the insurer and the
evidence adduced by the Appellant - Insurer is not sufficient to prove the defence. It was further
submitted that to absolve the liability of insurer, the breach on the part of insured must be a wilful
one, being of the fundamental condition by the insured himself and the burden of proof, therefore,
would be on the insurer. It was further submitted that with a view to avoid its liability, it is not
sufficient to show that the 3rd Respondent was not duly licensed but it must be further established
that there was breach on the part of the insured, which is lacking in this case.
9. We have carefully considered the rival contentions, materials on record and the award passed by
the Tribunal. The points falling for our consideration in this case are:
 3

United India Insurance Company Limited vs V.Vijayakumar on 8 September, 2010
(1) Whether the Tribunal was right in fastening the liability on the Appellant -
Insurance Company jointly along with the owner and driver of the vehicle (cid:22) maxi cab
bearing Regn.No.TN 27 L 3638?
(2) Whether the Appellant - Insurer has proved the defence as to breach or violation
of policy conditions?
(3) Whether based upon Section 149(1) of Motor Vehicles Act and the principle laid
down in the case of NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY LTD. VS. SWARAN SINGH
AND OTHERS (2004) 3 SCC 297, "pay and recover from the owner" can be ordered?
(4) Whether the quantum of compensation awarded by the Tribunal is without basis
and excessive as contended by the Appellant Insurance Company?
10. Points No.1 to 3:- The manner of accident is not in dispute. On 7.7.2002, at about 7.45 P.M,
while the 1st Respondent/Claimant was walking on the road opposite to Annur Bus stand, the 3rd
Respondent drove the Mahendra van bearing Registration No.TN 27 L 3638 from west to east in a
rash and negligent manner, hit against the claimant and the claimant sustained severe head injuries.
To prove the accident and negligence of van driver, P.W.6 (cid:22) Praveen was examined. In his evidence,
P.W.6 has stated that while he was standing in front of Annur Bus stand near flower shop and was
talking with his friend/claimant and were walking on the left side of the road towards east,
Mahendra van bearing Regn.No.TN 27 L 3638 came in a high speed, driven in a rash and negligent
manner, and hit against the Claimant, who sustained grievous head injury. In his evidence, P.W.6
has clearly stated that the accident was due to negligent driving of Mahendra van. His evidence is
strengthened by the recitals in Ex.A.1 - . F.I.R. (Crime No.292 of 2002). After completion of
investigation, charge sheet was filed against the van driver in S.T.C.No.448 of 2003. By perusal of
Ex.A.6 judgment in S.T.C.No.448 of 2003, it is seen that the driver of the offending vehicle viz., 3rd
Respondent had admitted the offence and paid fine, which strengthens the claimant's version. The
admission of guilt by the 3rd Respondent would show that he had no substantive defence. Evidence
of P.W.6 coupled with the admission of guilt by the van driver clearly shows that the accident was
due to the negligence of the Maxi cab Mahendra van driver and the Tribunal rightly held that the
3rd Respondent - driver of Mahendra van was responsible for the accident.
11. The main points falling for consideration are, whether the statutory liability can be fastened upon
the Insurance Company or whether there was breach of policy conditions and whether the Insurance
Company can be absolved of its statutory liability as contended by it.
12. As pointed out earlier, Respondents 3 and 4 (cid:22) driver and owner of Maxi cab Mahendra van
remained exparte. The plea of Insurance Company is that 3rd Respondent / driver was holding only
LMV licence and was not in possession of a badge required under Motor Vehicles Act and without
badge, he was permitted to drive the public service tourist Maxi Cab vehicle and there was violation
of the conditions of the policy by the owner/insured and therefore the Insurance Company is not
liable to pay the compensation. To substantiate their defence, R.W.1 (cid:22) Junior Assistant serving in
the office of Motor Vehicles Inspector, Mettur was examined. In his evidence, R.W.1 has stated that
 4

United India Insurance Company Limited vs V.Vijayakumar on 8 September, 2010
Respondent No.3- Marimuthu was holding driving licence No.1407/97 and he was licensed to drive
light motor vehicle and no badge has been issued permitting him to drive the private transport
vehicle. Further contention of the Insurance Company is that even though the offending vehicle
bearing Regn.No.TN 27 L 3638 is a light motor vehicle, the 3rd Respondent was not having a badge
as required under the provisions of Motor Vehicles Act and Tamil Nadu Motor Vehicles Rules and
therefore there was violation of policy conditions.
13. Learned counsel for the Appellant Mr.Arun Kumar contended that a person cannot be said to be
duly licensed "unless he has been granted a permeant licence for driving a particular vehicle in
terms of the provisions of Chapter II of Motor Vehicles Act. It was further contended that a vehicle
cannot be said to be driven by a person duly licensed therefor if (a) he does not hold a licence; (b) he
holds a fake licence; (c) he holds licence but the validity thereof had expired; (d) he does not hold a
licence for the type of vehicle which he was driving in terms of Chapter II of the Motor Vehicles Act,
1988 or (e) he holds merely a learner's licence. It was further contended that by examination of
R.W.1, an official from Motor Vehicles Inspector's Office, the burden cast upon the insurer that the
3rd Respondent did not have a valid licence for the transport vehicle (cid:22) tourist Maxi Cab was
discharged and while so the Tribunal erred in fastening the statutory liability upon the Insurance
Company.
14. Learned counsel for the respondent has submitted that once a certificate of insurance is issued in
terms of the provisions of the Act, the insurer has a liability to satisfy the award for the injuries
sustained by the third party. It was further contended that in terms of Section 149(1) of Motor
Vehicles Act, the insurer should pay first to the third parties and recover the same if they are
absolved on any of the grounds in sub-section (2) thereof. In support of his contention, the learned
counsel placed reliance upon National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Swaran Singh, (2004) 3 SCC 297. It was
further argued that breach on the part of the insured must be a wilful one being of fundamental
condition by the insured himself and the burden of proof, therefore, would be on the insurer.
15. Section 2 of the Motor Vehicles Act provides definitions of the terms. As per Section 2(21), "light
motor vehicle" means "a transport vehicle or omnibus the gross vehicle weight of either of which or
a motor car or tractor or road-roller the unladen weight of any of which, does not exceed 7500
kilograms"
As per Section 2(47), "transport vehicle" means "a public service vehicle, a goods
carriage, an educational institution bus or a private service vehicle."
16. Although the definition of the 'light motor vehicle' brings within its umbrage both 'transport
vehicle' or 'omnibus', there is a clear distinction between 'light motor vehicle' and 'transport vehicle'.
In ORIENTAL INSURANCE CO.LTD. VS. ANGAD KOL AND OTHERS, (2009 ACJ 1411), the
Supreme Court held as under:
"10. The distinction between a `light motor vehicle' and a `transport vehicle' is,
therefore, evident. A transport vehicle may be a light motor vehicle but for the
purpose of driving the same, a distinct licence is required to be obtained. The
 5

United India Insurance Company Limited vs V.Vijayakumar on 8 September, 2010
distinction between a `transport vehicle' and a `passenger vehicle' can also be
noticed from Section 14 of the Act. Sub- section (2) of Section 14 provides for
duration of a period of three years in case of an effective licence to drive a `transport
vehicle' whereas in case of any other licence, it may remain effective for a period of 20
years."
The effect of the different terms of licences granted in terms of the provisions of Section 2(14) and
2(47) has also been considered by the Supreme Court in New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Prabhu Lal
[(2008) 1 SCC 696].
17. Section 3 emphasises upon the necessity for driving licence. Section 9 provides for "Grant of
driving licence", which reads as under:
"9. Grant of driving licence.
(1) Any person who is not for the time being disqualified for holding or obtaining a
driving licence may apply to the licensing authority having jurisdiction in the area-
(i) in which he ordinarily resides or carries on business, or
(ii) in which the school or establishment referred in section 12 from where he is
receiving or has received instruction in driving a motor vehicle is situated.
for the issue to him of a driving licence.
......."
18. Section 14 deals with "Currency of licences to drive motor vehicles", which reads as under:
"14. Currency of licences to drive motor vehicles. - (1) A learner's licence issued under
this Act shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, be effective for a period of six
months from the date of issue of the licence.
(2) A driving licence issued or renewed under this Act shall,-
(a) in the case of a licence to drive a transport vehicle, be effective for a period of
three years:
.....
(b) in the case of any other licence,-
(i) if the person obtaining the licence, either originally or on renewal thereof, has not
attained the age of fifty years on the date of issue or, as the case may be, renewal
 6

United India Insurance Company Limited vs V.Vijayakumar on 8 September, 2010
thereof,-
(A) be effective for a period of twenty years from the date of such issue or renewal; or
(B) until the date on which such person attains the age of fifty years,whichever is
earlier;
(ii) ......
Provided that every driving licence shall, notwithstanding its expiry under this sub-section, continue
to be effective for a period of thirty days from such expiry."
19. As per Section 15(1) of the Motor Vehicles Act, on application made to it, any licensing authority
may renew a driving licence issued under the provisions of the Act with effect from the date of its
expiry. Section 15(2) stipulates that application for the renewal of a driving licence shall be made in
such form and accompanied by such documents as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
As per Section 3, no person shall drive a motor vehicle in any public place unless he holds an
effective driving licence issued to him authorising him to drive the vehicle. The Central Government
has framed the Rules known as "Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989". The word "Form" has been
defined in Rule 2(e) of the said Rules as "Form appended to the Central Motor Vehicles Rules".
20. In exercise of the powers conferred by Sections 28, 38, 65, 95, 107, 111 and 138 read with section
211 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, the Government of Tamil Nadu framed the Tamil Nadu Motor
Vehicles Rules, 1989. Chapter II of the Tamil Nadu Motor Vehicles Rules deals with "Licensing of
Drivers of Motor Vehicles.".
21. As per Rule 3(j) of Tamil Nadu Motor Vehicles Rules, "form" means a Form appended to the
Tamil Nadu Motor Vehicles Rules. Rule 7 provides for application for authorisation to drive a
transport vehicle. As per Rule 7, the holder of a driving licence may, at any time, appeal to the
licensing authority in Form LTVA for the grant of an authorisation to drive a transport vehicle. Such
application shall be accompanied by the driving licence and appropriate fee as specified in the Table
under rule 49. Rule 10 deals with "Issue of authorisation", which reads as under:
"10. Issue of authorisation. - The Licensing Authority granting an authorisation to
drive a transport vehicle shall allot a Badge number sign the driving licence
accordingly and return the same to the holder thereof and shall if it is not the
authority which issued the licence at the same time, send intimation in form LTV to
the authority by which the driving licence was issued."
22. As per Rule 12, every driver of a transport vehicle shall, in addition to the driving licence, carry
an authorisation issued by the owner of the vehicle in the prescribed form AVT. As per Rule 21, the
driver of a Transport vehicle while on duty, display on his left chest pocket a white plastic plate of
size 8 cms. 2 cms, inscribed with his name in bold black letters of size 0.5 cms, both in English and
in Tamil with badge number and the name of the District as set forth in the rule. The cost of the
name Plate shall be borne by the driver himself.
 7

United India Insurance Company Limited vs V.Vijayakumar on 8 September, 2010
23. Rule 37 deals with conduct of driver of a transport vehicle while on duty. Rule 40 deals with duty
of driver in the motor cab stand. Form LTVA is the Form of application for Authorisation to drive a
transport vehicle. Form LTV is the Form of intimation of grant of an authorisation to drive a
transport vehicle. Form AVT is form of authorisation to be carried by a driver of a transport vehicle.
24. A person holding a driving licence to ply 'light motor vehicle' cannot ply 'transport vehicle'. By a
combined reading of Rules 7, 10, 21 and 40, it is seen that a specific authorisation is required to
drive a transport vehicle and such authorisation is by way of badge number, which has to be
displayed by the driver of the Transport Vehicle. The conduct is also stipulated for the driver of the
transport vehicle while on duty and for the driver of the motor cab while on duty in the motor cab
stand.
25. The 3rd Respondent was having only LMV licence to ply light motor vehicle. A person holding
mere LMV licence is not a duly licensed driver to drive transport vehicle. To establish that 3rd
Respondent did not possess a valid licence to drive transport vehicle, Junior Assistant from Motor
Vehicles Inspector's office was examined as R.W.1. In Ex.A.3 (cid:22) Inspection report of Motor Vehicles
Inspector, as against the column "particulars of driver's licence", it is stated as "1407/96 (cid:22) 5.6.2016".
In his evidence, R.W.1 has clearly stated that the 3rd Respondent was not granted any authorisation
to drive the transport vehicle nor allotted a badge number and therefore 3rd Respondent was not
duly licensed to drive a transport vehicle. By examining R.W.1 and by adducing evidence on the
driving licence particulars of 3rd Respondent, the Insurance Company has discharged the burden
cast upon it in establishing that the driver did not have a valid driving licence to drive a transport
vehicle and that there was violation of policy conditions.
26. During the cross examination of R.W.1, it was suggested to him that the 3rd Respondent might
have obtained badge elsewhere in Tamil Nadu or in India and office of R.W.1 might not have known
about the same. To that question, R.W.1 has replied as under:
@mth; v';fs; mYtyfj;jpy; jhd; mg;go tpy;iy my;yJ ngl;$; bgwntz;Lbkd;W fl;lhak; ,y;iy/
vdnt mth; ,e;jpahtpy; ntW ve;j ,lj;jpYk; mg;go ngl;$; my;yJ tpy;iy bgWtjw;F
tha;g;g[s;sJ/ / / / / / / md;iwa njjpapy; bjhHpy;Kiw rhh;e;j ngl;$; tpy;iy bgWtjw;F
njitahd jFjpfs; midj;Jk; me;j Xl;LeUf;F ,Ue;jpUf;fpwJ/@
27. Referring to the above answer of R.W.1, and referring to 2004 ACJ 1 (ORIETNAL INSURANCE
CO.LTD. VS. SWARAN SINGH) the Tribunal held that 3rd Respondent might have obtained the
badge elsewhere and that the same might not have been brought to the notice of the licensing
authority and that there was no fundamental breach of the policy conditions. The Tribunal further
held that even though the 3rd Respondent (cid:22) driver was not in possession of valid driving licence to
drive a maxi cab there was no fundamental breach of the policy conditions and therefore Insurance
Company cannot avoid their liability on the ground that there was breach of condition.
28. There is no force in the contention that the driver might have obtained badge elsewhere and that
the same might not have been brought to the notice of the office of the Motor Vehicles Inspector in
Mettur. As per Rule 35 of Tamil Nadu Motor Vehicles Rules, a licensing authority renewing a driving
 8

United India Insurance Company Limited vs V.Vijayakumar on 8 September, 2010
licence under the provisions of sub-section (6) of Section 15, shall intimate the fact to the licensing
authority by which the driving licence was issued in Form LR. Rule 36 deals with "intimation of
addition to driving licence" which reads as under:
"A licensing authority adding under Section 11 to the classes of motor vehicle which a
driving licence authorises the holder to drive shall, if it is not the authority by which
the driving licence was issued, intimate the addition to that authority in form LAD."
It is thus clear that any additions made under Section 11 to the classes of Motor Vehicle which a
driving licence authorises the holder to drive shall intimate the addition to the licensing authority.
The absence of any endorsement in the driving licence as to the issuance of authorisation to drive
the transport vehicle and non-mention of allotment of badge number clearly shows that the 3rd
Respondent was not in possession of a valid driving licence and that he was not duly licensed to
drive the transport vehicle and there was violation of Policy conditions. The insurer and insured are
bound by the conditions enumerated in the Policy and the insurer is not liable to the insured if there
violation of Policy conditions.
29. We need to consider whether the insurer can be directed to pay compensation to the Claimant
and recover the same subsequently from the insured. The doctrine of "pay and recover" has been
recognised by the Supreme Court in Several decisions. In New India Assurance Company v. Kamla
and others [2001 (4) SCC 342 : AIR 2001 SC 1419], the Supreme Court held as follows:-
"21. A reading of the Proviso to sub-section (4) as well as the language employed in
sub-section (5) would indicate that they are intended to safeguard the interest of an
Insurer who otherwise has no liability to pay any amount to the insured but for the
provisions contained in Chapter XI of the Act. This means, the insurer has to pay to
the third parties only on account of the fact that a Policy of Insurance has been issued
in respect of the vehicle, but the Insurer is entitled to recover any such sum from the
insured if the Insurer were not otherwise liable to pay such sum to the insured by
virtue of the conditions of the contract of insurance indicated by the policy.
......
25. The position can be summed up thus:
The insurer and the insured are bound by the conditions enumerated in the policy
and the Insurer is not liable to the insured if there is violation of any policy condition.
But the insurer who is made statutorily liable to pay compensation to third parties on
account of the certificate of insurance issued shall be entitled to recover from the
insured the amount paid to the third parties, if there was any breach of policy
conditions on account of the vehicle being driven without a valid driving licence. ....
In the present case, if the Insurance Company succeeds in establishing that there was
breach of the policy condition, the Claims Tribunal shall direct the insured to pay that
amount to the Insurer. In default the Insurer shall (sic (cid:22) not?) be allowed to recover
 9

United India Insurance Company Limited vs V.Vijayakumar on 8 September, 2010
that amount (which the Insurer is directed to pay to the claimant third parties) from
the insured person."
30. In National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Swaran Singh,(2004) 3 SCC 297, the Supreme Court examined
the liability of the Insurance Company vis-a-vis the owner and held that the liability of the Insurance
Company would arise both from contract as well as from statute. Elaborately considering the
insurer's contractual liability as well as statutory liability vis-a-vis the claims of third parties, the
Supreme Court held as under:
"31. The right of the victim of a road accident to claim compensation is a statutory one. He is a
victim of an unforeseen situation. He would not ordinarily have a hand in it. The negligence on the
part of the victim may, however, be contributory. He has suffered owing to wrongdoing of others. An
accident may ruin an entire family. It may take away the only earning member. An accident may
result in the loss of her only son to a mother. An accident may take place for a variety of reasons.
The driver of a vehicle may not have a hand in it. He may not be found to be negligent in a given
case. Other factors such as unforeseen situation, negligence of the victim, bad road or the action or
inaction of any other person may lead to an accident.
....
72. A beneficent statute, as is well known, must receive a liberal interpretation. (See Bangalore
Water Supply & Sewerage Board v. A. Rajappa (1978) 2 SCC 213, Steel Authority of India Ltd. v.
National Union Waterfront Workers (2001) 7 SCC 1, ITI Ltd. v. Siemens Public Communications
Network Ltd.(2002) 5 SCC 510, Amrit Bhikaji Kale v. Kashinath Janardhan Trade (1983) 3 SCC 437
and Kunal Singh v. Union of India (2003) 4 SCC 524) .......
82. Proviso appended to sub-section (4) of Section 149 is referable only to sub-section (2) of Section
149 of the Act. It is an independent provision and must be read in the context of Section 96(4) of the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939. Furthermore, it is one thing to say that the insurer will be entitled to avoid
its liability owing to breach of terms of a contract of insurance but it is another thing to say that the
vehicle is not insured at all. If the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is accepted,
the same would render the proviso to sub-section (4) as well as sub-section (5) of Section 149 of the
Act otiose, nor can any effective meaning be attributed to the liability clause of the insurance
company contained in sub-section (1) of Section 149. The decision in NEW INDIA ASSURANCE
CO.LTD. VS. KAMALA, (2001 ACJ 843= 2001 4 SCC 342) has to be read in the aforementioned
context.
83. Sub-section (5) of Section 149 which imposes a liability on the insurer must also be given its full
effect. The insurance company may not be liable to satisfy the decree and, therefore, its liability may
be zero but it does mean that it did not have initial liability at all. Thus, if the insurance company is
made liable to pay any amount, it can recover the entire amount paid to the third party on behalf of
the assured. If this interpretation is not given to the beneficent provisions of the Act having regard
to its purport and object, we fail to see a situation where beneficent provisions can be given effect to.
Sub-section (7) of Section 149 of the Act, to which pointed attention of the Court has been drawn by
 10

United India Insurance Company Limited vs V.Vijayakumar on 8 September, 2010
the learned counsel for the petitioner, which is in negative language may now be noticed. The said
provision must be read with sub-section (1) thereof. The right to avoid liability in terms of
sub-section (2) of Section 149 is restricted as has been discussed hereinbefore. It is one thing to say
that the insurance companies are entitled to raise a defence but it is another thing to say that despite
the fact that its defence has been accepted having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case,
the Tribunal has power to direct them to satisfy the decree at the first instance and then direct
recovery of the same from the owner. These two matters stand apart and require contextual reading.
...... "
31. After referring to various decisions, in Swaran Singh's case, the Supreme Court
summarised its findings on the various decisions, which are as follows:
"110. The summary of our findings to the various issues as raised in these petitions is
as follows:
(i) Chapter XI of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 providing compulsory insurance of
vehicles against third-party risks is a social welfare legislation to extend relief by
compensation to victims of accidents caused by use of motor vehicles. The provisions
of compulsory insurance coverage of all vehicles are with this paramount object and
the provisions of the Act have to be so interpreted as to effectuate the said object.
(ii) An insurer is entitled to raise a defence in a claim petition filed under Section
163-A or Section 166 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, inter alia, in terms of Section
149(2)(a)(ii) of the said Act.
(iii) The breach of policy condition e.g. disqualification of the driver or invalid driving
licence of the driver, as contained in sub-section (2)(a)(ii) of Section 149, has to be
proved to have been committed by the insured for avoiding liability by the insurer.
Mere absence, fake or invalid driving licence or disqualification of the driver for
driving at the relevant time, are not in themselves defences available to the insurer
against either the insured or the third parties. To avoid its liability towards the
insured, the insurer has to prove that the insured was guilty of negligence and failed
to exercise reasonable care in the matter of fulfilling the condition of the policy
regarding use of vehicles by a duly licensed driver or one who was not disqualified to
drive at the relevant time.
(iv) Insurance companies, however, with a view to avoid their liability must not only
establish the available defence(s) raised in the said proceedings but must also
establish (cid:19)breach(cid:20) on the part of the owner of the vehicle; the burden of proof
wherefor would be on them.
(v) The court cannot lay down any criteria as to how the said burden would be
discharged, inasmuch as the same would depend upon the facts and circumstances of
each case.
 11

United India Insurance Company Limited vs V.Vijayakumar on 8 September, 2010
(vi) Even where the insurer is able to prove breach on the part of the insured
concerning the policy condition regarding holding of a valid licence by the driver or
his qualification to drive during the relevant period, the insurer would not be allowed
to avoid its liability towards the insured unless the said breach or breaches on the
condition of driving licence is/are so fundamental as are found to have contributed to
the cause of the accident. The Tribunals in interpreting the policy conditions would
apply (cid:19)the rule of main purpose(cid:20) and the concept of (cid:19)fundamental breach(cid:20) to allow
defences available to the insurer under Section 149(2) of the Act.
(vii) The question, as to whether the owner has taken reasonable care to find out as to
whether the driving licence produced by the driver (a fake one or otherwise), does not
fulfil the requirements of law or not will have to be determined in each case.
(viii) If a vehicle at the time of accident was driven by a person having a learner(cid:18)s
licence, the insurance companies would be liable to satisfy the decree.
(ix) The Claims Tribunal constituted under Section 165 read with Section 168 is
empowered to adjudicate all claims in respect of the accidents involving death or of
bodily injury or damage to property of third party arising in use of motor vehicle. The
said power of the Tribunal is not restricted to decide the claims inter se between
claimant or claimants on one side and insured, insurer and driver on the other. In the
course of adjudicating the claim for compensation and to decide the availability of
defence or defences to the insurer, the Tribunal has necessarily the power and
jurisdiction to decide disputes inter se between the insurer and the insured. The
decision rendered on the claims and disputes inter se between the insurer and
insured in the course of adjudication of claim for compensation by the claimants and
the award made thereon is enforceable and executable in the same manner as
provided in Section 174 of the Act for enforcement and execution of the award in
favour of the claimants.
(x) Where on adjudication of the claim under the Act the Tribunal arrives at a
conclusion that the insurer has satisfactorily proved its defence in accordance with
the provisions of Section 149(2) read with sub-section (7), as interpreted by this
Court above, the Tribunal can direct that the insurer is liable to be reimbursed by the
insured for the compensation and other amounts which it has been compelled to pay
to the third party under the award of the Tribunal. Such determination of claim by
the Tribunal will be enforceable and the money found due to the insurer from the
insured will be recoverable on a certificate issued by the Tribunal to the Collector in
the same manner under Section 174 of the Act as arrears of land revenue. The
certificate will be issued for the recovery as arrears of land revenue only if, as
required by sub-section (3) of Section 168 of the Act the insured fails to deposit the
amount awarded in favour of the insurer within thirty days from the date of
announcement of the award by the Tribunal.
 12

United India Insurance Company Limited vs V.Vijayakumar on 8 September, 2010
(xi) The provisions contained in sub-section (4) with the proviso thereunder and
sub-section (5) which are intended to cover specified contingencies mentioned
therein to enable the insurer to recover the amount paid under the contract of
insurance on behalf of the insured can be taken recourse to by the Tribunal and be
extended to claims and defences of the insurer against the insured by relegating them
to the remedy before regular court in cases where on given facts and circumstances
adjudication of their claims inter se might delay the adjudication of the claims of the
victims.
32. All the subsequent cases are guided by Swaran Singh's case. Onus is always upon the Insurance
Company to prove that the driver had no valid driving licence and that there was violation of breach
of policy conditions. Whenever the driver did not possess valid driving licence and breach of Policy
conditions where third party risk is involved, applying the ratio of decision in Swaran Singh's case is
not automatic. In the facts and circumstances of each case, Court/Tribunal has to consider the
nature of alleged breach of policy conditions and the Court may in its discretion direct the insurer to
pay first and order recovery.
33. Cases in which Insurance Company held not liable but ordered to pay and recover:- In the case
of National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs. Kusum Rai, 2006 ACJ 1336 (SC), the vehicle was being used as a
taxi and it was, therefore, a commercial vehicle. The driver of the said vehicle was required to hold
an appropriate license. Ram Lal, who allegedly was driving the said vehicle at the relevant time, was
holder of a licence to drive light motor vehicle only and he did not possess any licence to drive a
commercial vehicle. Therefore, there was a breach of condition of insurance policy. In such
circumstances, the Supreme Court held the appellant-National Insurance Co. Ltd., therefore, could
raise the said defence. While considering the stand of the Insurance Company, the Supreme Court,
pointing out the law laid down in Oriental Insurance Co.Ltd. Vs. Swaran Singh (2004) ACJ 1)
concluded that the owner of the vehicle cannot contend that he has no liability to verify the fact as to
whether the driver of the vehicle possessed a valid licence or not. However, taking note of the fact
that the owner has not appeared and that the victim was aged only 12 years, the claimants are from a
poor background and to avoid another round of litigation applying the decision in Oriental
Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Nanjappan, AIR 2004 SC 1630 = (2004) 13 SCC 224 = (2004) ACJ 721 (SC), in
exercise of jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution, Supreme Court declined to interfere
with the impugned judgment thereon and permitted the appellant-Insurance Company therein to
recover the amount from the owner of the vehicle.
34. Cases where the Insurance Company was exonerated from its liability and "no order as to pay
and recovery":- In a catena of decisions, the Supreme Court held that on the basis of Section 149 (1)
of the Motor Vehicles Act and applying of ratio held in Swaran Singh case is not automatic. Onus is
on the Insurance Company to prove that the driver had no driving licence to escape from the
liability. In Prem Kumari vs. Prahlad Dev [2008 A.C.J. 776 ], the driving licence was a fake one. The
Tribunal held that the driver, who is the brother of the insured, did not possess a valid and effective
licence on the date of the accident and exonerated the insurance company from liability.
 13

United India Insurance Company Limited vs V.Vijayakumar on 8 September, 2010
35. In National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs. Laxmi Narain Dhut, 2007 A.C.J. 721 (SC), The following
conclusions in para 41 are relevant :-
"41. In view of the above analysis the following situations emerge : (1) The decision in
Swaran Singh case has no application to cases other than third-party risks.
(2) Where originally the licence was a fake one, renewal cannot cure the inherent
fatality.
(3) In case of third-party risks the insurer has to indemnify the amount, and if so
advised, to recover the same from the insured.
(4) The concept of purposive interpretation has no application to cases relatable to
Section 149 of the Act."
36. In Bhuvan Singh vs. M/s. Oriental Insurance Company Ltd.[J.T. 2009 (3) S.C. 333], the driver of
the offending vehicle was holding a learner's licence and it expired on 22.12.2000. The accident
occurred on 5.1.2001. He applied for a regular licence only on 22.1.2001. The Supreme Court
referred to various provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act and also referred to the fact that while
Section 3 of the Act uses the words 'effective licence' and Section 149(2) uses the words "duly
licensed". The Supreme Court held that since the driver had applied for grant of licence after the
accident and therefore the insurance company was not liable.
37. Considering the above decisions and from the facts and evidence, as it emerges from the records
that the 3rd Respondent, who was driving the tourist maxi cab, has no licence on the date of the
accident. But as pointed out earlier, the 3rd Respondent was having a driving licence for LMV, he
had not obtained necessary authorisation to drive a transport vehicle and badge was not allotted to
him and he has not obtained the badge for driving a transport vehicle (cid:22) tourist maxi cab.
38. The 3rd Respondent had a licence, but not a valid one. As there was violation of conditions of
policy, Tribunal was not right in fastening the statutory liability upon the Insurance Company. Since
there was violation of policy conditions the Tribunal ought not to have fastened the statutory
liability upon the Insurance Company. Keeping in view the nature of injuries sustained by the
claimant and that the claimant is now reduced to vegetable existence, the only just and reasonable
course would be to direct the Insurance Company to pay compensation to the 1st Respondent (cid:22)
Claimant and recover it from the owner for his breach of the policy conditions.
39. Point No.4:- In the instant case, claimant has sustained severe head injuries (cid:22) diffuse axonal
injury (cid:22) avulsion of right pinna. Because of severe head injury, after the accident, claimant became
unconscious. In her evidence, P.W.1 (cid:22) mother of claimant has stated that after the accident,
claimant became unconscious. After the accident, claimant was admitted in Kovai Medical Center
and Hospital Limited, where he was in intensive care unit for about 5 1/2 months. He was on
ventilator for a period of 46 days. Tracheostomy was performed for better tracheal toileting. From
Ex.A.8- discharge summary, patient was given chest physiotherapy and occupational therapy was
 14

United India Insurance Company Limited vs V.Vijayakumar on 8 September, 2010
given to the limbs. it is seen that tracheostomy was performed and tracheostomy was removed after
4 months.
40. From the evidence of P.W.1 and from Ex.A.8, it is seen that even after intensive treatment, there
was no motor speech to the claimant, he was on tube feeding and was not able to swallow and all the
limbs were decerabrating. He has taken treatment as in-patient for five months and at the time of
discharge, he was advised to continue physiotherapy, occupational therapy and good nursing care.
In her evidence P.W.1 stated that even after treatment, claimant was not able to move his hands and
legs and only liquid food was provided through a tube. P.W.1 has stated that they have spent nearly
12 lakhs for the medical treatment. P.W.1 has produced Ex.A.9 - bills.
41. P.W.4 (cid:22) Dr.Manohar, Plastic surgeon of Kovai Medical Centre and Hospital Limited, who has
also treated the claimant has spoken about the nature of treatment and performing of operation.
P.W.2 has also stated that at the time of discharg,e claimant was not able to speak and there was no
function of the body and food has to be provided through nasal tube and he was discharged with
advise for physiotherapy treatment. P.W.4 has also stated that the claimant is not able to speak and
he is not able to hear. Ex.A.13 is the disability certificate issued by P.W.4.
42. P.W.4 has assessed the permanent disability at 95 percent and issued Ex.A.13 - disability
certificate. In Ex.A.13 (cid:22) disability certificate, it is clearly stated that P.W.4 has examined the
claimant on 5.7.2004 and noticed that he was totally paralysed and not able to move all four limbs
and he is not responding to any stimulation and he is not able to obey any commands. P.W.4 has
also stated that injured claimant is totally bed ridden and no control over his bladder or bowel
movements and that he is not able to swallow any solid food and not able to speak or hear anything.
From the evidence of P.W.4, it is seen that the Claimant is totally paralysed and almost in a coma
stage. Throughout his life the claimant needs constant care and attention.
43. P.W.5 - Dr.Maragatham Swaminathan has spoken about the nature of treatment and the
medical expenses. P.W.3 (cid:22) Dr.K.Bhaskar has provided physiotherapy treatment for the claimant and
the amount of Rs.28,000/- was paid towards his charges. P.W.7- Dr.C.Venugopal has also provided
treatment in his Modern Physiotherapy clinic at Tiruppur from 27.12.2002 to 11.12.2003 and he
charged a sum of Rs.67,500/-. Taking into account Ex.A.9 and evidence of P.Ws.3, 5 and 7 the
Tribunal has awarded compensation of Rs.9,37,095/- towards medical expenses and we maintain
the same.
44. At the time of accident, deceased was working as Accountant in Kumaran Garments. He was
working as a part time employee in Kumaran Garments and about one month prior to the accident
he was full time employee in Kumaran garments. He was paid salary of Rs.4,500/-. P.W.2 has
produced Ex.P.10 (cid:22) salary certificate evidencing that the claimant was getting salary of Rs.4,500/-
per month. Claimant was a B.Com graduate and aged 22 years at the time of accident. The claimant
is now reduced to a vegetable existence and for rest of his life he has to depend on others. Keeping in
view the nature of injuries and the qualification of claimant, the Tribunal was justified in taking the
salary of the claimant at Rs.4,500/- and fixed the percentage of disability at 95%. In fact, the salary
taken and percentage of disability is quite conservative if we may say so.
 15

United India Insurance Company Limited vs V.Vijayakumar on 8 September, 2010
45. In the case of UNITED INDIA INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITD VS. VELUCHAMY, (2005 (1)
CTC 38), Division Bench of this Court has held that having regard to the nature of injuries, in
appropriate cases, Court can adopt multiplier method to award compensation for permanent
disability. The determination of the quantum must be liberal and not meagre. The entire future of
the claimant is now crippled and he is now confined to bed and incapacitated. The Tribunal has
taken the income of the claimant at Rs.4,500/- per month and rightly adopted multiplier the
method by adopting multiplier 16. In our considered view, the compensation of Rs.8,20,800/-
(Rs.4,500 x 12 x 16 x 95/100) awarded for the "permanent disability" is just and reasonable and the
same is maintained.
46. Insofar as "pain and suffering", Tribunal has awarded only a sum of Rs.25,000/- and for "mental
agony" a sum of Rs.75,000/- has been awarded. Though compensation under the separate head
"mental agony" is not maintainable and cannot be ordered, having regard to the less amount of
compensation awarded for "pain and suffering", the compensation of Rs.75,000/- awarded under
the head "mental agony" could be clubbed under the head "pain and suffering" and the same is
enhanced to Rs.1,00,000/-. Insofar as the conventional damages under the heads, "extra
nourishment" and "transport", the Tribunal has awarded Rs.1,000/- each and the same is
maintained. As pointed out, earlier, claimant has been continuously taking treatment and the
compensation of Rs.1,00,000/-awarded for actual loss of income is also reasonable and the same is
maintained. The Tribunal in fact could have awarded more compensation for future medical
expenses and attendant charges. Since there is no cross appeal/objection, we leave at that. In our
considered view, total compensation of Rs.19,59,895/- together with interest at 9% per annum
awarded by the Tribunal as compensation to the claimant cannot be said to be excessive or on the
higher side.
47. For the reasons stated above, in view of the decision of NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY
LTD. VS. SWARAN SINGH AND OTHERS (2004) 3 SCC 297 and reiterated in other decisions we
are of the view that the Appellant - insurer must pay the amount to the claimant - 1st Respondent
and then recover the same from the insured and to that extent the award passed by the Tribunal has
to be modified.
48. In the result, the quantum of compensation of Rs.19,59,895/- awarded by the Tribunal in
M.C.O.P.No.428 of 2003 on the file of the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal (Principal Subordinate
Judge), Coimbatore is confirmed. The award passed by the Tribunal holding that the Appellant
Insurance Company is jointly and severally liable to pay the compensation along with Respondents
No.3 and 4 (cid:22) driver and owner of the vehicle is modified and it is held that the Appellant Insurance
Company must pay the compensation amount to the 1st respondent (cid:22) Claimant along with interest
at 9% per annum and then recover the same from the insured and Civil Miscellaneous Appeal is
partly allowed to that limited extent. The Insurance Company is entitled to file execution petition
against respondents 3 and 4 in the same proceedings and on the basis of this judgment/award.
49. As per the direction of the Court, the Appellant Insurance Company has already deposited
Rs.15,00,000/-, out of which the Claimant has withdrawn the lumpsum amount of Rs.10,00,000/-.
The Appellant Insurance Company is directed to deposit the balance amount of compensation along
 16

United India Insurance Company Limited vs V.Vijayakumar on 8 September, 2010
with accrued interest within a period of eight weeks from the date of receipt of copy of this
judgement. On such deposit, the Claimant is permitted to withdraw the entire compensation
amount along with accrued interest at the rate of 9 percent per annum. However, there is no order
as to costs in this appeal.
(R.B.I.,J.) (G.M.A.,J..) 08.09.2010
Index:Yes
Internet:Yes
usk
Copy to:
Motor Accident Claims Tribunal
(Prl.Subordinate Judge)
Coimbatore
R.BANUMATHI,J.
AND
G.M.AKBAR ALI,J.
usk
Judgment
 17

United India Insurance Company Limited vs V.Vijayakumar on 8 September, 2010
08.09.2010
 18