Ashokbhai Shankar Chaudhary & vs Jayendra Virendra Sharma & on 22 July, 2014
Ashokbhai Shankar Chaudhary & vs Jayendra Virendra Sharma
& on 22 July, 2014
Author: S.H.Vora
Bench: S.H.Vora
C/AO/196/2014 ORDER
IN THE HIGH COURT OF GUJARAT AT AHMEDABAD
APPEAL FROM ORDER NO. 196 of 2014
With
CIVIL APPLICATION NO. 4792 of 2014
In
APPEAL FROM ORDER NO. 196 of 2014
With
APPEAL FROM ORDER NO. 197 of 2014
With
CIVIL APPLICATION NO. 4793 of 2014
In
APPEAL FROM ORDER NO. 197 of 2014
================================================================
ASHOKBHAI SHANKAR CHAUDHARY & 1....Appellant(s)
Versus
JAYENDRA VIRENDRA SHARMA & 1....Respondent(s)
================================================================
Appearance:
MS TRUSHA K PATEL, ADVOCATE for the Appellant(s) No. 1 - 2
MR YN OZA FOR MR S P MAJMUDAR, ADVOCATE for the Respondent(s)
No. 1
MR TATTVAM K PATEL, ADVOCATE for the Respondent(s) No. 2
================================================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.H.VORA
Date : 22/07/2014
ORAL ORDER
1. Challenge in both these Appeal from Orders is the order dated 31.03.2014 passed by the learned 3
rd Additional Senior Civil Judge, Vadodara below Exhs.5 and 37 in Special Civil Suit No.263 of 2010
whereby, the learned trial Judge by allowing both the injunction applications Exh.5 and 37, directed
the parties to the suit to maintain status quo position qua title and possession of the property
bearing Revenue Survey No.544/3 admeasuring 19260 sq.ft. including constructed property, more
 1

Ashokbhai Shankar Chaudhary & vs Jayendra Virendra Sharma & on 22 July, 2014
particularly, described in plaint para 10 (for short, the 'suit property').
2. The parties to the present proceedings would be referred to as per their original status in the
plaint for convenience.
3. I have heard submissions of learned advocate Ms.Trusha Patel for the defendant Nos.2 and 3 -
appellants herein, learned Senior Counsel Mr.Y.N. Oza appearing for learned advocate Mr.S.P.
Majmudar for the plaintiff - respondent No.1 and learned advocate Mr.Tattvam K. Patel for
defendant No.1- respondent No.2.
4. Briefly stated, the suit property originally owned by Mr.Gnanendra Sharma and Mr.Vijendra
Sharma. Upon demise of Mr.Vijendra Sharma, the plaintiff became co-sharer of the suit property
with Mr.Gnanendra Sharma. It is also a matter of fact that said Mr.Gnanendra Sharma expired and,
therefore, his son i.e. defendant No.1 succeeded/acquired ½ share in the suit property. In nutshell,
the plaintiff and defendant No.1 became co-sharers of the suit property and both were holding ½
undivided share in the suit property. It is the case of the defendant Nos.2 and 3 that they have
purchased undivided ½ share in the suit property from defendant No.1 vide Registered Sale Deed
dated 28.10.2010 and they have paid Rs.32 lacs to the defendant No.1. Prior to it, the plaintiff and
defendant No.1 entered into an Agreement to Sale on 07.03.2007 for consideration of Rs.15 lacs
wherein, the defendant No.1 agreed to sale his undivided ½ share to the plaintiff and received part
payment of Rs.1,50,000/- by way of cheque. It is the case of the plaintiff that the plaintiff and
defendant No.1 are cousin brothers and the plaintiff paid further Rs.50,000/- and thereafter, he was
put into possession of the entire suit property by defendant No.1. As the defendant No.1 was trying
to transfer the suit property to the third party, the plaintiff filed a suit for specific performance of the
Sale Agreement dated 07.03.2007. Pending hearing of the suit, as the defendant No.1 sold ½
undivided share of the suit property to the defendant Nos.2 and 3 by virtue of Registered Sale Deed
dated 28.10.2010, the plaintiff also amended the plaint, inter alia, sought further relief to cancel the
said sale deed executed by the defendant No.1 in favour of defendant Nos.2 and 3 on 28.10.2010.
Pending hearing of the suit, the plaintiff filed an injunction application Exh.5, inter alia, praying to
restrain the defendants to transfer the suit property to the third party. Before hearing of the
injunction application Exh.5 commences and concludes, the defendant No.1 sold his ½ undivided
share to the defendant Nos.2 and 3 and, therefore, the plaintiff was compelled to file injunction
application Exh.37 restraining defendant Nos.2 and 3 from transferring, assigning, gifting, leasing
or mortgaging the suit property and further restraining defendant Nos.2 and 3 from dispossessing
the plaintiff from the suit property.
5. After considering the pleadings and submissions made at bar, the learned trial Judge accepted the
plaintiff's injunction applications filed below Exh.5 and 37 and directed both the parties to maintain
status quo position of title and possession qua the suit property.
6. While assailing the impugned order, learned advocate Ms.Trusha Patel for the defendant Nos.2
and 3 submitted that the defendant Nos.2 and 3 are transferee/purchasers pendente lite and as they
are bona fide purchasers, they are protected under Section 19 of the Specific Relief Act against
specific performance of prior sale agreement. It is submitted by her that as per condition Nos.2,3,4
 2

Ashokbhai Shankar Chaudhary & vs Jayendra Virendra Sharma & on 22 July, 2014
and 8 of the Sale Agreement dated 07.03.2007, the plaintiff was to be put into possession only upon
execution of sale deed. It is further submitted that the plaintiff was required to pay balance
consideration to the defendant No.1 after three months of mutation entry to be effected in the
revenue records and as the plaintiff has failed to pay balance consideration on or before 29.12.2009,
as mutation was effected on 24.09.2009, the plaintiff is not entitled to any discretionary relief in his
favour. It is submitted by her that vide public notice dated 15.02.2010, the defendant No.1 has
cancelled the Sale Agreement dated 07.03.2007 as the plaintiff failed to pay balance consideration
within time fixed in the agreement. It is submitted by her that the defendant Nos.2 and 3 before
entering into sale deed published public notice for title clearance on 02.03.2010. It is further
submitted by her that the plaintiff cannot claim exclusive possession for the suit property as the
plaintiff and defendant No.1 are holding ½ undivided share in the suit property as they are joint
possessor of the suit property. In nutshell, it is submitted by learned advocate Ms.Patel that the
plaintiff failed to perform his part of sale agreement and defendant Nos.2 and 3 being bona fide
purchasers of ½ undivided share in the suit property, the learned trial Judge ought not to have
injuncted the defendant Nos.2 and 3 from transferring their right, title and interest in the suit
property pending trial. In support of her factual and legal submissions, learned advocate Ms.Patel
pressed into service decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court rendered in the case of Gujarat Electricity
Board, Gandhinagar V/s. M/s.Maheshkumar & Co., Ahmedabad reported in AIR 1982 Gujarat 289
for the submission that temporary injunction under Order 39 Rule 2 cannot be granted on mere
possibility of multiplicity of judicial proceedings and it is not a relevant consideration. Learned
advocate Ms.Patel also relied upon the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court rendered in the case of
Thomson Press (India) Limited V/s. Nanak Builders and Investors Private Limited and others
reported in (2013)5 SCC 397 for the proposition of law that sale of immovable property is immune
from specific performance of prior sale agreement only if transferee has acquired title for valuable
consideration, in good faith and without notice of prior agreement. Further, the transfer/sale
pendente lite would remain valid between the parties thereto subject to any directions which
competent Court may issue in the suit against vendor in light of the provisions contained in Sections
52 and 54 of the Transfer of Property Act.
7. Per contra, learned Senior Counsel Mr.Y.N. Oza appearing for learned advocate Mr.S.P.
Majmudar for the plaintiff submitted that the learned trial Judge has rightly directed both the
parties to maintain status quo position of title and possession qua the suit property as the
defendants failed to make out a case of irreparable loss or damage. It is also submitted that the
defendant Nos.2 and 3 have also filed Special Civil Suit No.342 of 2013 against the present plaintiff
for partition and other ancillary reliefs and also moved an injunction application against the plaintiff
not to disturb enjoyment of ½ share in the suit property. The learned trial Judge refused the
injunction application filed by the defendant Nos.2 and 3 and such order is also confirmed by this
Court vide order dated 06.05.2014 passed in Appeal from Order No.195 of 2014. Thus, relying upon
the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court rendered in the case of Maharwal Khewaji Trust (Regd.),
Faridkot V/s. Baldev Dass reported in AIR 2005 SC 104 and the order passed by this Court in
Appeal from Order No.195 of 2014, learned Senior Counsel Mr.Oza submitted that no case is made
out to interfere with the findings recorded by the learned trial Judge as no perversity is pointed out
in the impugned order and also considering limited scope of Order 43 Rule 1(r) of the Code of Civil
Procedure, the present appeals are required to be dismissed.
 3

Ashokbhai Shankar Chaudhary & vs Jayendra Virendra Sharma & on 22 July, 2014
8. Considering the facts and submissions made at bar and the case laws cited at bar, it is a fact that
the defendant Nos.2 and 3 purchased ½ undivided share in the suit property from the defendant
No.1 by Registered Sale Deed dated 28.10.2010. Prior to execution of sale deed, defendant Nos.2
and 3 were made aware about existence of sale agreement executed by defendant No.1 in favour of
the plaintiff through public notice. So, at this stage, it cannot be said that defendant Nos.2 and 3
have entered into sale transactions with defendant No.1 without notice of prior sale agreement. So,
at this stage, it cannot be inferred that the defendant Nos.2 and 3 are the bona fide purchasers as
provided under Section 19-B of the Specific Relief Act so as to non-suit the plaintiff at threshold. It is
an admitted fact that the defendant Nos.2 and 3 have also filed a suit for partition and other
ancilliary reliefs against the plaintiff and in the said suit, defendant Nos.2 and 3 moved an
injunction application against the plaintiff restraining them not to disturb enjoyment of ½ share in
the suit property and such other reliefs. Such injunction application came to be refused by the
learned trial Judge and when the said order was carried before this Court by way of Appeal from
Order No.195 of 2014, this Court also refused to grant relief as sought for by the defendant Nos.2
and 3.
9. It is an undisputed fact that the suit property has not been partitioned actually and physically till
date. Therefore, co- sharer i.e. defendant No.1 cannot put the defendant Nos.2 and 3 in possession
of suit property. In this connection, it is suffice to refer to the principles laid down by the Hon'ble
Apex Court in case of Ramdas Vs. Sitabai and others reported in AIR 2009 SC 2735. In nutshell,
right of defendant Nos.2 and 3 to possess ½ part in the suit property would commence from the
date when specific allotment would be made in their favour at the end of the trial of Special Civil
Suit No.342 of 2013 and, therefore, defendant Nos.2 and 3 cannot be handed over possession of any
specific part of the suit property unless the suit property is partitioned by metes and bounds
amicably or through mutual consent or by decree of the Court. It is also admitted fact that the
plaintiff is holding ½ undivided share in the suit property and for rest of ½ undivided share of the
defendant No.1, the plaintiff is holding sale agreement in his favour.
10. Now coming to the submission made by learned advocate Ms.Patel to the effect that the
defendant Nos.2 and 3 cannot be prevented from transferring their right, title and interest in the
suit property because of possibility of multiplicity of judicial proceedings and in this connection,
decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court rendered in the case of Gujarat Electricity Board (supra) is not
helpful to the defendant Nos.2 and 3 for the simple reason that in the facts and circumstances before
the Court in the said case, it was found that mere possibility of multiplicity of judicial proceedings is
not a relevant consideration. In the case on hand, the plaintiff has made out a case that the
defendant Nos.2 and 3 should not be permitted to further transfer ½ undivided share in the suit
property as it would result into irreparable loss. A case of irreparable loss or damage once made out
by the plaintiff to the suit which also includes alienation or transfer of the property which may lead
to loss or damage being caused to the plaintiff who may ultimately succeed and may further lead to
multiplicity of proceedings. In the instant case, the plaintiff has successfully established that the
defendant Nos.2 and 3 are not bona fide purchasers of ½ undivided share of the defendant No.1 in
the suit property and more so, defendant Nos.2 and 3 have failed to obtain injunction order against
the plaintiff in a suit for partition filed by them. In this connection, it is useful to refer to the
observations made by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Maharwal Khewaji Trust (supra), more
 4

Ashokbhai Shankar Chaudhary & vs Jayendra Virendra Sharma & on 22 July, 2014
particularly, para 10 thereof which reads as under:-
"10. Be that as it may, Mr. Sachhar is right in contending that unless and until a case
of irreparable loss or damage is made out by a party to the suit, the Court should not
permit the nature of the property being changed which also includes alienation or
transfer of the property which may lead to loss or damage being caused to the party
who may ultimately succeed and may further lead to multiplicity of proceedings. In
the instant case no such case of irreparable loss is made out except contending that
the legal proceedings are likely to take a long time, therefore, the respondent should
be permitted to put the scheduled property to better use. We do not think in the facts
and circumstances of this case, the lower appellate Court and the High Court were
justified in permitting the respondent to change the nature of property by putting up
construction as also by permitting the alienation of the property, whatever may be
the condition on which the same is done. In the event of the appellant's claim being
found baseless ultimately, it is always open to the respondent to claim damages, or, in
an appropriate case, the Court may itself award damages for the loss suffered, if any,
in this regard. Since the facts of this case do not make out any extraordinary ground
for permitting the respondent to put up construction and alienate the same, we think
both the Courts below, namely, the lower appellate Court and the High Court erred in
making the impugned orders. The said orders are set aside and the order of the trial
Court is restored."
11. Now, so far as the decision rendered in the case of Thomson Press (India) Limited (supra) is
concerned, the said decision is not helpful to the defendant Nos.2 and 3 at this stage for the simple
reason that this Court has found that the defendant Nos.2 and 3 are not bona fide purchasers of ½
undivided share in the suit property. So, in view of this decision it is futile that specific performance,
as prayed for by the plaintiff, was and continues to be enforceable not only against the defendant
No.1 but also against the defendant Nos.2 and 3 i.e. transferees. Needless to say here that the sale of
immovable property in the teeth of an earlier Agreement to Sale is immune from specific
performance of an earlier contract for sale only if the transferee has acquired title for valuable
consideration, in good faith and without notice of the original contract i.e. sale agreement dated
07.03.2007. It is an admitted fact that the plaintiff by public notice published in the newspaper on
13.05.2010, disclosed existence of Sale Agreement dated 07.03.2007 in his favour. So, in view of the
provisions contained in Section 19-B of the Specific Relief Act, it is not gainsaid that the plaintiff was
not protected against specific performance of the contract or even though the defendant No.1
transferred his ½ share in the suit property in favour of the defendant Nos.2 and 3 for valuable
consideration as it was not in good faith nor was it without notice of the pre- existing sale agreement
dated 07.03.2007. In light of this fact, defendant Nos.2 and 3 would have the defences that were
available to the defendant No.1. It may be true that the plaintiff failed to pay the balance
consideration on or before 29.12.2009 i.e. the date fixed in the sale agreement. Normally, in the
contract relating to immovable property, time cannot be essence of contract and the time stipulated
in performance even if expressly read and shown to be the essence required to be read as not being
essence of contract and consequently, the contract relating to immovable property does not become
terminable by failure to perform before specified time. Thus, it cannot be accepted that as the
 5

Ashokbhai Shankar Chaudhary & vs Jayendra Virendra Sharma & on 22 July, 2014
plaintiff failed to pay balance consideration, defendant No.1 has rightly terminated sale agreement
by public notice dated 16.02.2010. Apart from it, whether time was essence of the contract or not is
a question to be tried as defendant No.1 approached in the month of February, 2010 with request to
pay balance consideration. So, in light of these facts, it cannot be accepted that the plaintiff's sale
agreement dated 07.03.2007 is no more in existence as submitted by learned advocate Ms.Patel.
Therefore, there is no substance in the said contention so raised that the sale agreement dated
07.03.2007 in favour of the plaintiff is terminated.
12. It is required to be kept in mind that the present Appeal from Order is filed under the provisions
of Order 43 Rule 1(r) of the Code and challenge in this appeal is a discretionary order passed by the
learned trial Judge under the provisions of Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 of the Code. In case of Matrix
Telecom Pvt.Ltd. V/s. Matrix Cellular Services Pvt. Ltd. reported in 2011(3) GLR 1951, this Court, in
paras 6 and 6.1, observed as under:-
"6. Before proceeding further it is required to be noted that the present appeal is
against the rejection of interim relief and the main suit is still pending. If this court
elaborately deals with the matter on merits it is likely that the same would prejudice
the case of either side. Therefore, it is well settled law that this Court is not required
to go into the merits of the entire matter at this stage and what is required to be seen
is whether the appellant-plaintiff has made out a prima facie case or not for grant of
interim injunction.
6.1. It is required to be noted that it is well settled law that the Appellate Court may
not interfere with the exercise of discretion of the court of first instance and
substitute its own discretion except where the discretion has been shown to have
been exercised arbitrarily, or capriciously or perversely or where the court had
ignored the settled principles of law regulating grant or refusal of interlocutory
injunctions. An appeal against exercise of discretion is said to be an appeal on
principle. The Appellate Court will not reassess the material and seek to reach a
conclusion different from the one reached by the court below if the one reached by
the court was reasonably possible on the material. The appellate court would
normally not be justified in interfering with the exercise of discretion under appeal
solely on the ground that if it had considered the matter at the trial stage it would
have come to a contrary conclusion."
13. Similarly, in the case of Wonder Ltd. and another V/s. Antox India Pvt. Ltd. reported in 1990
(Supp.) SCC 727, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in para 9 of the said decision, after considering the
scope of Order 43 Rule 1(r) of the Code in an appeal wherein, the discretionary order passed by the
learned trial Court is under challenge, observed as under:-
"9. Usually, the prayer for grant of an interlocutory injunction is at a stage when the
existence of the legal right asserted by the plaintiff and its alleged violation are both
contested and uncertain and remain uncertain till they are established at the trial on
evidence. The court, at this stage, acts on certain well settled principles of
 6

Ashokbhai Shankar Chaudhary & vs Jayendra Virendra Sharma & on 22 July, 2014
administration of this form of interlocutory remedy which is both temporary and
discretionary. The object of the interlocutory injunction, it is stated "...is to protect
the plaintiff against injury by violation of his rights for which he could not adequately
be compensated in damages recoverable in the action if the uncertainty were resolved
in his favour at the trial. The need for such protection must be weighed against the
corresponding need of the defendant to be protected against injury resulting from his
having been prevented from exercising his own legal rights for which he could not be
adequately compensated. The court must weigh one need against another and
determine where the "balance of convenience lies".
The interlocutory remedy is intended to preserve in status quo, the rights of parties which may
appear on a prima facie. The court also, in restraining a defendant from exercising what he
considers his legal right but what the plaintiff would like to be prevented, puts into the scales, as a
relevant consideration whether the defendant has yet to commence his enterprise or whether he has
already been doing so in which latter case considerations somewhat different from those that apply
to a case where the defendant is yet to commence his enterprise, are attracted."
14. So, in light of the limited powers of this Court, the Appellate Court can interfere with the
discretionary order passed by the trial Court only in exceptional circumstances and the Appellate
Court cannot interfere with the exercise of discretion of the Court of first instance and substitute its
own discretion except, where the discretion has been shown to have been exercised arbitrarily,
capriciously or perversely or where the Court had ignored the settled principles of law regulating
grant or refusal of interlocutory injunctions. In nutshell, an appeal against exercise of discretion is
said to be an appeal on principle. To put it differently, the Appellate Court cannot reassess the entire
evidence so as to come to its own conclusion contrary to the conclusion arrived at by the trial Court,
if two views are possible.
15. In the sum and substance, no case is made out so as to infer that the learned trial Judge has
exercised discretion arbitrarily or perversely or ignored the settled principles of law regulating grant
or refusal of interlocutory injunctions. Thus, the Appellate Court cannot reassess the entire evidence
so as to come to its own conclusion contrary to the conclusion arrived at by the trial Court for taking
second view as suggested by learned advocate Ms.Patel to the effect that multiplicity of judicial
proceedings is not a relevant consideration in view of the decision rendered in the case of Gujarat
Electricity Board (supra).
16. At this stage, learned advocate Ms.Patel urged that the learned trial Judge may be directed to
consolidate both the suits i.e. Special Civil Suit Nos.342 of 2013 and 263 of 2010 since the subject
matter is the same in both the suits. She further submitted that the learned trial Judge may be
directed to expedite hearing of the suit so that lis involved in the present suit may be put to an end at
the earliest point of time. Considering the request made at bar, defendant Nos.2 and 3 are at liberty
to move the trial Court for both the prayers so made at bar. As and when such prayer is made, the
learned trial Judge shall consider the same, if think fit and proper, to grant the same.
 7

Ashokbhai Shankar Chaudhary & vs Jayendra Virendra Sharma & on 22 July, 2014
17. Lastly, learned advocate Mr.Tattvam Patel for the defendant No.1 tried to address the Court on
the issue of legality and validity of the impugned order. The Court refrained him from addressing
the Court as the defendant No.1 has not challenged the impugned order passed below Exh.5 and 37
and, therefore, defendant No.1 has no locus to challenge the impugned order without preferring
appropriate proceedings in accordance with law.
18. While parting with the order, it is clarified that this Court has examined the impugned order
passed by the learned trial Judge within the limited scope of provisions of Order 43 Rule 1(r) of the
Code, whereas the main controversy involved in the suit is at large before the trial Court to be
adjudicated through full-fledge trial. Therefore, the learned trial Judge shall not be influenced by
any observations recorded in the impugned order and observations recorded by this Court
hereinabove while deciding the suit at the end of trial. The findings recorded either by the trial Court
or by this Court at interlocutory stage of the suit are tentative in its nature and the learned trial
Judge shall decide the case on its merit and as per evidence that may be led during the course of trial
and decide the suit in accordance with law.
19. In view of the above, no case is made out to interfere with the findings recorded by the learned
trial Judge in the impugned order and, therefore, present appeals deserve to be dismissed and are
accordingly dismissed.
Order in Civil Applications In view of the order passed in the Appeal from Orders, these applications
do not survive and the same are also dismissed.
(S.H.VORA, J.) Hitesh
 8