Liyakat Ali vs Smt Chunni Devi on 16 July, 2010
Liyakat Ali vs Smt Chunni Devi on 16 July, 2010
Author: Devi Prasad Singh
Bench: Devi Prasad Singh
-1-
Reserved
Case :- FIRST APPEAL FROM ORDER No. - 600 of 2009
Petitioner :- Liyakat Ali
Respondent :- Smt Chunni Devi
Petitioner Counsel :- Rajeev Kr. Sinha
***********
Hon'ble Devi Prasad Singh,J.
Hon'ble Dr. Satish Chandra,J.
(Delivered by Hon'ble Dr. Satish Chandra, J) This appeal is filed under Section 173 of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988 against the judgment and order dated 27.01.2009 passed by Motor Accident
Claims Tribunal, Unnao in Claim Petition No. 117 of 2001 whereby an award of Rs.1,18,850/- was
awarded against the appellant.
The brief facts of the case in narrow compass are that on 02.12.2000, one Sri Arvind Kumar was
going on scooter to see off his relative. When he reached near Hyderabad Paisara, one Tractor No.
U.P. 35-B 1649 took a sharp turn. The Iron Rods loaded in the trolley (trailer) attached to the tractor
in question hits the deceased Arvind Kumar, who died on the spot. The FIR was lodged. The Tractor
was insured but trolley was not insured. So, the liability was fixed against the owner of the Tractor
i.e. appellant by the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal for Rs.1,18,850/-. Being aggrieved, he filed the
present appeal.
During the course of argument, learned counsel for the appellant submits that the trailer is the part
of the tractor and tractor was duly insured. Independently, the tractor or trolley is not of any use.
With the tractor, some equipments or trolley will have to be attached for the purpose of agricultural
activity. He further submits that trailer/trolley falls within the definition of the vehicles, as such, it is
an attachment made to the prime mover of tractor and it has no independent driving system.
Therefore, it is not required to be insured under the provisions of Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and
insurance company is liable to pay the compensation.
According to the appellant's counsel, deceased was driving the scooter without holding any valid
license. He also submits that at the time of accident, the tractor was used to transport the bricks and
iron rods for the purpose of construction of Pakki Boring in a room to secure the boring equipments
for irrigation purposes. So, the tractor was used for agricultural purposes. Its driver was having the
 1

Liyakat Ali vs Smt Chunni Devi on 16 July, 2010
valid driving license to drive the tractor and at the time of accident, the tractor was duly insured. So,
the liability will have to be fixed against the insurance company. He relied on the ratio laid down in
the cases of Nagashetty v. United India Insurance Company Ltd.; 2001 A.C.J. 1441; 2001 (3) T.A.C.
511 and also a judgement in the case of Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. J. Kotiratnama, 2000 (3) An.
W.R. 91.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the insurance company submits that the tractor was insured
but trolley was not insured. No premium was paid for the trolley as per Section 61 of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988. He further submits that the tractor was insured only for the purpose of
agricultural use but the appellant was carrying the bricks and iron rods in the trolley. So, it is the
violation of the terms and conditions of the policy. Again, he repeated that the trolley is not the part
of the tractor as no premium for the trolley was paid to the insurance company.
We have heard both the parties at length and gone through the material available on record.
There is no dispute regarding the accident or amount of compensation. The only dispute is that who
will pay the compensation i.e. the owner of the tractor or the insurance company.
In the instant case, the tractor in question (No. U.P. 35-B 1649) was duly insured with the insurance
company. Admittedly, no separate premium was paid for the trolley. This was the specific defense
taken by the insurance company.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of National Insurance Company v. Chinnamma and others;
2004 (3) TAC 577 SC defines the meaning of tractor and trailer, which reads as under:
"Tractor: 'tractor' means a motor vehicle which is not itself constructed to carry any
load (other than equipment used for the purpose of population); but excludes a road
roller.
Trailer: trailer means by any vehicle, other than a semi-trailer and a side-car, drawn
or intended to be drawn by a motor vehicles."
In the case of Parsottambhai Kanbhai v. Panchiben alias Ratanben, 1977 A.C.J. 441 Hon'ble Gujarat
High Court made an observation that "As the trailer is included in the expression motor vehicle, it
was required to be insured.
The word 'trailer' was separately defined from the inclusive definition, which was made. In such an
event, the meaning assigned to the respective words has to be culled out. As can be seen from the
various definitions like articulated vehicles, contract carriage, goods carriage, heavy goods vehicle,
heavy passenger, motor vehicle, invalid carriage, maxi cab, motor cab, motor car, motor cycle,
omnibus, private service vehicles, they were defined as motor vehicles including tractor, but the
trailer was defined as motor vehicle, which was intended to drawn by a motor vehicle. Thus, it is
evident that it is not a mechanically propelled vehicle either power of propulsion is transmitted from
external or internal sources. Therefore, even though, Section 2 (46) embraces trailer within the
 2

Liyakat Ali vs Smt Chunni Devi on 16 July, 2010
definition of 'motor vehicle' or 'vehicle', but further distinction has to be drawn between the vehicle
and motor vehicle and that distinction has to be carved out on the basis of the specific definition
given to the word trailer. Therefore, while all the motor vehicles may fall within the definition of
vehicles, but, all the vehicles are not motor vehicles. The trailer as such is an attachment made to the
prime mover either a tractor or a mechanical contrivance and it has no independent propulsion. The
trailer always is a detachable container, which does not have any independent driving system. Its
movements are dependent on the prime mover, such as tractor, motor vehicle etc. Hence, insurance
of trailer is not a mandatory requirement under the provisions of Section 146 of Motor Vehicles Act
and if the prime mover/motor vehicle/tractor is insured and the negligence of the driver of the said
motor vehicle is established, the compensation is payable by the owner of the tractor and insurer
irrespective of the fact whether the victim suffers injury with the tractor or with the trailer.
Therefore, we are of the view that in such cases, the insurance company is also liable along with the
owner of the tractor/trailer to pay compensation.
Further, in the case of United India Insurance Company Ltd. v. Surinder and others; 2005 (1) TAC
270 (P&H), it was observed that tractor means a motor vehicle which is not itself constructed to
carry any load other than (the equipments used for the purpose) or propulsion but excludes a road
roller.
On a perusal of the definition of word 'tractor' shows that the tractor itself is not able to carry any
load without the equipments. Therefore, any equipments attached to the tractor is a part of the
tractor and covered under the insurance policy.
In view of the above, we observed that the trailer/trolley, which is attached with the tractor is a part
of the tractor, which was duly insured from the insurance company. Hence, the insurance company
cannot escape from its liability to pay compensation by taking the plea that the trailer was not
separately insured.
But in the instant case, fact remains that at the time of accident, the trolley which was attached with
the tractor was carrying the Iron Rods and Bricks for the purpose of construction of a room to cover
the pakki boring as admitted by the appellant in paragraph-3 of the affidavit. Transportation of iron
rods and bricks is certainly not an agricultural activity. The tractor was insured only for the purpose
of agricultural activity. The tractor will have to be used only for agricultural purpose not for any
other purpose including the construction of a room. Thus, there is a violation of the terms and
conditions of the insurance policy. When it is so, then we are of the view that in the instant case, the
insurance company is not liable to pay the compensation and the owner of the tractor will have to
pay the compensation.
Hence, we uphold the judgment and order dated 27.01.2009 passed by Motor Accident Claims
Tribunal, Unnao in Claim Petition No. 117 of 2001, of course for different reason, as stated above.
Since, the quantum is not disputed, the appellant shall deposit the balance amount, if any, before
the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Unnao within a period of two months. We further direct the
registry to transmit the entire amount to the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Unnao, and the
Tribunal will proceed in terms of the award.
 3

Liyakat Ali vs Smt Chunni Devi on 16 July, 2010
In view of the aforesaid, the appeal is dismissed.
Order Date :-16.07.2010 VNP/-
 4