M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance
Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
NATIONAL CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION
NATIONAL
CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION
New
Delhi
Complaint Case No. 121
of 1999
M/s Crown Consultants
(P) Ltd
Laxmi Bhawan (5th
Floor)
158/164, Kalbadevi Road
 1

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
Complainant
Mumbai 400 002
versus
1. The Oriental
Insurance Company Ltd
Through its Regional
Manager, Regional Office
Oriental House (7th
Floor)
Jamshetji Tata Road
Mumbai 400 020
Opposite Parties
2. HIH Winterrthur
Underwriting (Australia) Pty. Ltd
 2

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
Through its Group
Managing Director
AMP Centre, 50 Bridge
Street
Sydney NSW 2000,
Australia
BEFORE:
HONBLE MR.
JUSTICE R. C. JAIN PRESIDING MEMBER
HONBLE MR. ANUPAM
DASGUPTA
MEMBER
For the Complainant Mr. Sukumar Pattjoshi, Advocate
For the Opposite Parties Mr. P. K. Seth, Advocate
Dated 31st
May 2011
 3

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
ORDER
ANUPAM DASGUPTA The complainant in this case is a private limited company owned and
managed by one Chandaliya family, with registered office in Mumbai and engaged in stock broking.
In that capacity, the company became a member of the National Stock Exchange of India Ltd. (NSE)
and started its trading operations at that Exchange in October 1995 from its online terminal at Pune.
The complaint pertains to the alleged deficiency in service on the part of opposite party no. 1, the
Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. (hereafter, OP 1) in repudiating, without justification, the
complainants claim for indemnification of the loss of Rs. 43.06 lakh approximately. The
complainant claims it suffered this loss because of deception by an unidentified person in the course
of its stock broking business, which was a peril covered by an insurance policy availed of by the
complainant from OP 1. The prayer in the complaint, however, is for award of a sum of Rs. 66,
30,500/-. This sum includes the alleged loss of Rs. 43,05,032/-, interest on the said amount @ 18%
per annum for the period 01.07.1996 to 30.04.1999 and cost of Rs. 30,000/- on travel, etc., in
pursuing the repudiated insurance claim and compensation of Rs. 1 lakh towards harassment and
mental agony. In addition, the complainant has prayed for subsequent interest on the
above-mentioned sum @ 18% per annum from the date of filing the complaint upto realisation.
Opposite party no. 2 (hereafter, OP 2) is the foreign re-insurer of OP 1 and has chosen not to be
represented in these proceedings.
2. The undisputed facts are few. In view of the various risks faced by its members in the business of
trading in stocks as well as the directives of the Securities and Exchanges Board of India (SEBI) in
that context, the NSE was looking out for an obligatory insurance policy for all its members. When
OP 1 offered a product that appeared suitable to cover such risks, the NSE negotiated the policy
cover sometime during 1995 and required that all its member stockbrokers avail of the said policy
and pay the requisite premia directly to OP 1. The stock trading at the NSE was based almost ab
initio on computer-assisted online trading, with the authorised computer terminals at the premises
of the member stockbrokers being linked to the central computer (server) of the NSE for viewing,
with due authorisation, the continuously quoted prices for buying and selling of listed stocks and
executing the trades based thereon. The clients of the individual member stockbrokers would
contact them, including on telephone, and, give instructions for purchase/sale of stocks. Based on
their instructions, the authorised trader of the member stockbroker would bid for purchase/sale of
the specified stocks at those prices (or, thereabouts). The authorised trader would execute the trades
of purchase/sale of the stocks when the prices displayed by the central server of the NSE on the
screen of the member brokers computer terminal(s) would match the bid prices. Given this nature
and modality of operation, there were clearly several types of possible errors of omission and
commission in such trading. Hence, the insurance policy negotiated by the NSE with OP 1 provided
for covering the member brokers against such risks, subject to the conditions and exclusions
specified in the terms and conditions of the policy. The complainants cover was for indemnification
 4

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
of loss because of the specified perils to the extent of Rs. 25 lakh for any one event (or loss) during
the period 19.10.1995 31.05.1995. As the amount of the premium payable by a member was
dependent on the members turnover, the complainant paid a higher supplementary premium at a
subsequent stage during the year. The complainant, however, suffered a loss of Rs. 43,05,932/- in a
set of share purchase (and sale) transactions on behalf of one of its clients during 01-03.05.1996 and
lodged a claim for indemnification under the above-mentioned insurance policy on 30.06.1996,
under intimation to the NSE on the same day. On 02.07.1996, OP 1 appointed M/s Padamsey P.
Shah and Company, Surveyors and Loss Adjusters, Mumbai to assess the loss reported by the
complainant. The surveyor made enquiries and submitted his report dated 23.10.1996, to OP 1,
recommending that the insurer, OP 1 had no liability in this case under the relevant Certificate of
Insurance. Based on the surveyors report, OP 1 finally repudiated the complainants claim by its
letter of 23.05.1997, citing three specific grounds. These grounds were:
1. Claim was lodged on 1.7.96 i.e. more than 30 days after the incident and
crystallisation of the loss on 7.5.96 and not immediately.
2. The Member constituent agreement with the client was not executed on stamp
paper duly notarised, which is not as per NSE/SEBI rules and falls under Policy
exclusion.
3.
Client codes were not entered on several occasions by your office at the time of trading but entered
subsequently and also not for all trades. This practice is also not as per NSE rules.
The complainants case is that OP 1 committed deficiency in service under the provisions of the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (hereafter, the Act) because these grounds are not valid under terms
of the insurance policy and the rules and regulations of the National Stock Exchange of India
Limited and OP 1 also did not respond to the complainants request for reconsideration of its
decision to repudiate the claim. Hence, the complainant filed this complaint on 21.05.1999 (i.e.,
almost exactly 2 years from the date of repudiation of the insurance claim).
3 (i) We have heard Mr. Sukumar Pattjoshi, learned counsel for the complainant and Mr. P. K. Seth,
learned counsel for OP 1 and considered the pleadings, evidence and records furnished by the
parties.
(ii) We have also had the benefit of hearing and perusing the affidavit filed by Mr. T. Venkat Rao,
Manager, NSE Branch Office at New Delhi in response to our notice to the NSE for clarification on
certain technical and NSE/SEBI rule/regulation-related issues that we wanted to be clarified
generally and also some issues with reference to the conduct of business by the complainant
 5

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
company in its capacity as a member of the NSE.
4. The case of the complainant, as argued at length by Mr. Pattjoshi, is as under:
(i) A Mumbai-based person, known to the complainants Directors, introduced
to the complainant a new client, named Babu Lal Sethia, proprietor of M/s Sethia
Investments, Laxmi Bazar, Barmer, Rajasthan (hereafter, referred to as Sethia). The
complainant started doing business with Sethia with effect from 27.03.1996 and
executed the necessary member constituent agreement on 01.04.1996. The agreed
operating arrangement was that Sethia would place orders for purchase/sale of
stocks on telephone from his place of residence/business at Barmer and the
complainants person in-charge of the trading terminal at Pune would execute them.
The complainant carried out trades on behalf of Sethia in this manner, without any
problem, for five successive settlements during April 1996. During this period, the
complainant regularly sent the contract notes for the trades to Sethia by courier. At
the end of each (NSE) settlement period, the outstandings, if any, were settled. Sethia
had also informed the complainant that he would at times place orders on behalf of
one Mangilal Nahata of Barmer (hereafter referred to as Nahata) and he (Sethia)
would clarify on telephone if any particular trade had to be done in the name of
Nahata. Nahata would also occasionally call up the complainants office to enquire
about share prices, etc., to be able to do trades through Sethia.
(ii) On 01.05.1996, Manoj Chandaliya, a Director of the complainant company
and the person in-charge of operating the complainants computerised trading
terminal at Pune, received a call from a person who said he was Sethia, calling from
Barmer and wanted to place orders for purchase of some shares. Manoj Chandaliya
could not fully recognise the callers voice and enquired with the caller, to which the
latter said that the volume was low because it was a long-distance call and he was
using a call-conference facility. However, the caller gave the details of some previous
deals of Sethia, a recent payment made by demand draft and the system of internal
marking of deals between Sethia and Nahata (an arrangement specific to this client).
Therefore, Manoj Chandaliya believed the stated identity of the caller and executed
the orders. Manoj Chandaliya also executed similar orders of purchase of shares on
02.05.1996 and 03.05.1996 on receipt of calls, which was in the same voice as that he
heard on 01.05.1996. The corresponding contract notes were prepared accordingly
and sent by courier to Sethia at the end of each day.
 6

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
(iii) However, sometime after the market hours on 03.05.1996, on receiving the
contract note for the purchases of 01.05.1996, Sethia called up the complainants
trader (Manoj Chandaliya) to say that he had not placed any share purchase orders
on 01.05.1996. When the trader informed Sethia about the further purchases of
02.05.1996 and 03.05.1996 made on his behalf, he expressed surprise and flatly
denied them all. Sethia also telephoned Pramod Chandaliya, another Director of the
complainant to say he was not even at Barmer during that period as he was busy
studying the general elections being held around that time. This led the complainant
to make urgent enquiries with all concerned in Mumbai, Barmer, etc., but to no avail.
(iv) On 04.05.1996, therefore, the Board of Directors of the complainant company met and
decided to square up the deals done on behalf of Sethia. The share prices had fallen during the
period 01-03.05.1996 (04.05 and 05.05.1996 were Saturday and Sunday). The complainant squared
up only a small part of the trades purportedly done on behalf of Sethia on 06.05.1996 on
best-judgment basis, with the expectation that the market might recover on 07.05. 1996. The
complainant finally squared up the deals on 07.05.1996, the last day of the relevant settlement
period. The net loss on account of the deals thus done on behalf of Sethia during the three-day
period of 01 03.05.1996 came to Rs. 43,05,032/-. The complainant also intimated the fact to Sethia.
(v) The enquiries at Pune/Mumbai by the Directors of the complainant on 03.05.1996 and
thereafter into the possible deception suffered by the complainant in these transactions on behalf of
Sethia did not lead to any concrete conclusion. Therefore, Prakash Chandaliya and his brother Kiran
Chandaliya, both Directors of the company visited Barmer on 08.05.1996 to make detailed
enquiries. In the several rounds of discussions that they had with Sethia at Barmer, the latter
continued to deny that he had placed the share purchase orders in question. Prakash and Kiran
Chandaliya also met and sought the assistance of Sethias relatives and friends, including Nahata, as
well as persons known to the Chandaliya family. They made enquiries about the telephone calls from
Barmer during the period of 01-03.1996 at the local Telephone Exchange and the public call booths
near Sethias office/residence. They also went to the local Police Station to make enquiries about
Sethias standing in the area and creditworthiness. However, none of these enquiries gave any clue to
the identity of the possible caller who could have made those telephone calls placing orders for
purchase of shares. After these attempts, the Chandaliya brothers returned to Mumbai on
11.05.1996.
(vi) The Board of Directors of the company met on 12.05.1996 and, in view of the Directors
report, concluded that some unidentified person had deceived the complainant, by representing
himself to be Sethia and placing the orders in question for purchase of shares. The Board
accordingly decided to pay up the loss by arranging funds. However, even after paying up the loss to
 7

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
make good the deliveries, the Chairman of the company, Shantilal Chandaliya was still not satisfied
that it was not possible to ascertain the identity of the person who had represented himself to be
Sethia. Therefore, on 28.05.1996, he himself went to Barmer for further enquiries. Yet, after
checking minute details with the persons concerned at Barmer over a couple of days, the Chairman
also came to the same conclusion that they had been deceived by some unknown caller and returned
from Barmer. The company did not correspond with Sethia thereafter because everything had been
clarified between the company representatives and Sethia during this period of enquiry. Thus,
according to the complainant, the loss in this set of transactions crystallised on 01.06.1996.
(vii) It took the complainant some more time thereafter to obtain a copy of the detailed terms
and conditions of the insurance policy from the office of the NSE because all that the OP 1 had
provided to the complainant was a Certificate of Insurance. The complainant lodged the first
information report with the NSE by its letter dated 30.06.1996 and, on the same day, endorsed a
copy to OP 1. This intimation was thus within the period of 30 days of crystallisation of the loss,
which, according to the complainant, took place on 01.06.1996.
(viii) The repudiation of the claim by OP 1 was not in accord with the terms and conditions of the
insurance policy. The first information report to the NSE and (consequently) the claim with OP 1
were filed within 30 days of crystallisation of the loss, which was on 01.06.1996 and not 07.05.1996,
as stated in the letter of repudiation. This was so because the complainant needed reasonable time
to make the necessary attempts, as it actually did, to verify if Sethia had made the calls leading to the
share purchase transactions during 01-03.05.1996. Only when, at the end of their enquiries, the
Chairman of the complainant company was satisfied that Sethia did not indeed make these calls
could it be said that a loss from the purchase/sale of the shares in question had crystallised and the
loss was attributable to deception by some unknown caller. These attempts of the complainant to
establish the deception went on until the end of May 1996. The second ground for repudiation was
that the member-constituent agreement between the complainant and Sethia was not on stamp
paper nor was it duly notarised. This ground was also not valid because the NSE or SEBI regulations
requiring such compliance did not exist in 1996 when the cause of action arose. The third ground of
repudiation too was misconceived because the NSE introduced the requirement of entering specific
client codes in each sale/purchase transaction by member stockbrokers in December 1996, i.e.,
much after the period of the sale/purchase transactions of the shares in question, viz., May 1996.
Moreover, in this case, the names of Sethia or Nahata were entered, by hand, in the
computer-printed transaction records when such transactions took place (except on 01.05.1996), as
and when the person in-charge of the terminal had enough time to do so, in the midst of the priority
to actually execute the orders on behalf of various clients.
 8

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
(ix) In terms of the procedure prescribed for filing claims under the insurance policy, it was
necessary for the complainant to furnish only a narration of events to disclose the entire incident
wherein the insured was deceived as to the identity of any person for the purpose of buying and
selling of securities and steps taken pursuant to the deceit (sic). The claim proposal of the
complainant met with both these requirements.
(x) The survey report was deficient and biased. The surveyors representative did not make
enquiries with Sethia nor did he visit Barmer to question him. He did not inform the Police at Pune,
did not think it necessary to make enquiries with any employee of the complainant at Pune about
the incidents in question and did not even meet the representatives of the complainant after the first
meeting of 12.07.1996. The report made some speculative observations about the complainants
conduct after 07.05.1996 in recommending that the claim was not genuine and OP 1 merely
accepted the survey report, without giving the complainant a copy thereof.
(xi) The complainant sent a review petition to the Chairman of OP 1 on 16.06.1997. Yet, it did
not get a reply explaining the reasons for repudiation of the claim. This action was against the policy
guidelines of OP 1 regarding grievance redressal.
(xii) The complainant also met the country representative of the insurance consultants M/s
Jardin Insurance Consultants Ltd. and that of the re-insurer company (OP 2) sometime in July 1997
in a joint meeting with the representatives of OP 1 and explained the situation. According to the
complainant, the latter expressed surprise that OP 1 had repudiated the claim and refused to
consider even arbitration.
(xiii) Thus, OP 1 had committed acts of deficiency in service in wrongfully repudiating the
complainants claim for indemnification of the loss in accordance with the terms and conditions of
the insurance policy.
5. On the other hand, Mr. Seth has argued the case of OP 1 as under:
(i) Despite being a member stockbroker of the NSE, the complainant failed,
willfully and deliberately, to exercise due diligence in ascertaining and determining
the authenticity of the orders for purchase of shares made on telephone, particularly
the identity of the caller. As admitted, the complainant had known and dealt with
 9

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
Sethia only for about four weeks. In such a situation, no prudent stockbroker could
act upon such telephonic instructions, considering the number of orders placed in the
course of a three-day period and the large sums of money involved. Further, it is also
the usual practice of stockbrokers to ascertain/confirm and then enter the client
codes to ensure that the orders placed by the clients, particularly on telephone from
outside are genuine and then get the contract notes confirmed by faxing them in case
of large outstanding positions. The complainants person in-charge of the terminal
should have done this, particularly when the voice of the caller was not clear and the
former was not sure if the caller was indeed Sethia, as the caller claimed.
(ii) The alleged deception was clear by the afternoon of 03.05.1996 when Sethia
completely denied having placed the orders for the transactions of the last 3 days. As
such, the complainant should have taken steps to either square up the deals or cancel
the trades in the morning of 04.05.1996 and should have informed the NSE Market
Watch the same day. However, despite its Board of Directors deciding on 04.05.96 to
square up the outstandings, the complainant actually squared up only on 07.05.96,
i.e., the last day of the settlement and sold only a small number of the purchased
scrips on 06.05.1996.
(iii) The complainant reported the loss on 30.06.1996. This was after the lapse of
about 55 days from 07.05.96. This was the date on which, according to the
complainant itself, both the amount of loss and the circumstances leading thereto
were fully clear. Thus, the complainant filed the claim for indemnification of the
alleged loss well after the period of 30 days stipulated in the terms of the insurance
policy, without any valid and bona fide reason. The filing of a claim for loss within the
period stipulated in the policy was one of the most crucial conditions, prominently
highlighted on the Certificate of Insurance available with the complainant ab initio.
(iv) The complainant failed to lodge any FIR with the Police Station concerned
in respect of the said loss, though it suspected deception. It was not the task of either
the surveyor appointed by OP 1 or OP 1 itself to advise the complainant to lodge an
FIR with the Police but the duty of the complainant to do so immediately in respect of
the alleged deception resulting in loss.
However, only after the surveyor advised the complainant that the complainant wrote a highly
belated letter dated 20.07.1996 to the Police Station concerned about the said incident. Police FIR
about the alleged deception and loss was not registered.
 10

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
(v) It was wrong to state that the representative of M/s Jardin Insurance Consultants Ltd. had
commented in a joint meeting of the Directors of the complainants company and representatives of
OPs 1 and 2 that there was no practice in India at that time of stockbrokers seeking and obtaining
faxed confirmation of telephonic orders placed by the clients. Similarly, it was also not true that
there was no practice of using passwords and most of the business was done on such oral orders, in
good faith. It was also wrong to contend that the re-insurer (OP 2) acknowledged in principle the
validity of the complainants case or proposed a compromise settlement or arbitration. OP 1 could
settle insurance claim of the complainant only according to the terms and conditions of the
insurance policy and repudiated it because it was not payable. OP 1 was primarily responsible to
take a final decision in the matter.
(vi) The insurance claim of the complainant had to be examined in accordance with the terms
and conditions of the insurance policy under which the insured was covered and not based on any
change/addition/subtraction of any of the terms and conditions of the insurance policy issued for
subsequent years. The contract of insurance between the parties during the period in question was a
concluded contract. Both the complainant and OP 1 were bound by those terms and conditions of
the insurance policy in question.
(vii) OP 1 repudiated the claim of the complainant after due examination of related documents
and the attendant circumstances and taking into consideration the report of the surveyor appointed
to assess the loss. Even on re-examination, as a sequel to the complainants review petition, OP 1
found that the repudiation of the claim was justified in the facts and circumstances of the case.
DISCUSSION 6 (i) We may first observe that it was the Chandaliya family alone which owned and
managed the complainant company, with its registered office in Mumbai and stock trading
computer terminal at Pune. This was not an old-style stock broking outfit consisting of one or few
semi-literate stockbrokers. As pointed out in the surveyors report, an un-rebutted position, the
family also had, at least at the relevant time, a Chartered Accountancy practice in the name of some
other firm. In the course of hearing the complaint, it also came to our notice that Manoj Chandaliya,
a Director of the complainants company and the person in-charge of the companys trading terminal
at Pune was himself a qualified Chartered Accountant. In other words, some well-educated,
comparatively younger persons managed the complainants company and, at least one of the
Directors, namely, Manoj Chandaliya, was a Chartered Accountant. The management of the
company was thus well familiar with the principles and practices of due diligence in various
commercial operations, including trading in equity shares.
 11

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
(ii) We may also note that at the behest of the Government of India, some leading financial
institutions set up the National Stock Exchange (NSE) as a company in November 1992 and it
received recognition as a stock exchange in April 1993. The NSEs mission objectives were:
Establishing a nation-wide trading facility for equities, debt instruments and hybrids;
Ensuring equal access to investors all over the country through an appropriate
communication network;
Providing a fair, efficient and transparent securities market to investors using
electronic trading systems;
Enabling shorter settlement cycles and book entry settlement systems; and Meeting
the current international standards of securities markets.
NSEs capital market (equities) segment of operations went live in November 1994. By
October 1995, the NSE had already become the largest stock exchange in the country,
overtaking the much older Bombay Stock Exchange. One of the principal
distinguishing features of the trading operations at the NSE was that the member
stockbrokers did screen-based trading using modern information technology (IT)
facilities made available by the NSE. Apart from substantially speeding up each stage
of operations in execution of trades in stocks and debt instruments, the IT
infrastructure and operating procedures of the NSE aimed at minimising the
possibility of fraudulent trades, either by investors or by member brokers, by
ensuring computerised protocol of recording each transaction. [Source: NSE
Website]
(iii) It is necessary, in our view, to keep in mind this background of the complainant
company and the operating procedures permissible under the rules and regulations
of the NSE.
7 (i) The complainant (member) and Sethia (M/s Sethia Investments - constituent) executed a
member-constituent agreement on 01.04.1996, as mandated under the regulations of the NSE. A
specific clause in the preamble to this agreement, reproduced below, is of particular relevance to the
case:
Whereas the MEMBER has satisfied and shall continuously satisfy himself about the
genuineness and financial soundness of the CONSTITUENT and the investment
objectives relevant to the services to be provided. [Emphasis supplied] The first point
of interest in this context is the admission in the complaint that the transactions with
Sethia started on 27.03.1996 (Wednesday) in NSE settlement no. 1996013 (in brief,
13), i.e., several days before entering into the mandatory agreement, which was of
 12

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
01.04.1996 (Monday).
(ii) Secondly, it is the case of the complainant that someone, whom the complainants
Directors knew well, introduced Sethia. However, there is no evidence, not even a
claim, that Nahata was also similarly introduced to the complainant. In fact,
admittedly, it was only Sethia who informed the complainant that someone called
Nahata would also buy and sell shares through him (Sethia). It is a position
volunteered by the complainant that this Nahata would off and on call up
complainants office to make enquiries about share prices and obviously his queries
would be entertained by the complainant. Further, from the copies of the
computer-generated records produced by the complainant in respect of the trades
done during the settlement period in question (online trade confirmation slips, vide
Annexure P 10 and trade details vide Annexure P 37) enclosed by the complainant
with its complaint and rejoinder affidavit respectively, we find that several trades
were entered in the name of Nahata, under the heading settlor or the column marked
Client A/c. Nahata was surely not a client of the complainants only Sethia (or, more
accurately, M/s Sethia Investments) was such a client. This raises the question: were
such trades, clearly in the name of an altogether different person (not even claimed to
be a partner of the firm M/s Sethia Investments), at all permissible under the
regulations of the NSE, without the complainant executing another
member-constituent agreement with Nahata? If such trades were permissible, it is
easy to see that the NSE regulation, which required a member stockbroker to enter
into a member - constituent agreement with each intending investor, could be easily
subverted. This is the next limb of the conduct of the complainants that needs to be
noted in this case.
(iii) In the affidavit filed before us, it has been specifically averred on behalf of the
NSE on this issue as follows: As already mentioned above, under Regulation 4.3.1 of
Chapter 4 of Part A of the Capital Market Regulations of NSE, every Trading Member
is required to enter into a member constituent agreement with each of its
constituents before accepting or placing orders on behalf of the constituents.
Therefore, in view of the said Regulation, accepting or placing orders on behalf of a
friend or associate of a constituent would not be in accordance with the said
Regulation.
(iv) It is clear from this averment of the NSE that both in starting trading on behalf of
Sethia before entering into the member constituent agreement with him and in
trading with Nahata on the mere say-so of Sethia without entering into separate
 13

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
member constituent agreement with the former, the complainant breached the
relevant NSE regulation.
(v) In response to our query, the NSE has also brought to our notice that the
operations of the complainant during the period 04 18.03.1996 (i.e., a period shortly
before commencement of its transactions with Sethia and Nahata) were subjected to
an inspection through a Chartered Accountancy firm appointed by the NSE. NSE has
furnished a copy of the inspection report. It has also furnished a copy of its letter
dated 21.04.1997 addressed to the complainant from which it is seen that the
complainant was reprimanded and instructed to adhere to the Rules, Regulations and
Bye-Laws of the Exchange with regard to its violations of (a) not collecting margins
from constituents and (b) not maintaining register of transactions and also urged and
advised to execute proper Member - Constituent Agreements as per the Exchange
Requirements because such agreements entered into by the complainant with its
constituents were not stamped.
8 (a) As regards the sequence of events constituting the very basis of the insurance claim, that is,
how the deception by some unknown person came about and led to the loss, it is useful to notice the
narration of events by the complainant in its first information report of 30.06.1996 (31.05.1996?)
sent to the NSE (and OP 1).
(i) In the first information report, the following was stated:
(8) The fact that a huge quantity was outstanding on the 3rd day of settlement was
the main reason to arise (sic arouse) suspicion about the clients (sic clients)
outstanding position. The member then immediately contacted the client during the
market hours of the 3rd day of the settlement to confirm his outstanding position and
to request him to send additional margin for keeping the position outstanding.
However, as the client was not available the member could not confirm the
outstanding position with him. Later in the day after the market hours when the daily
confirmation note for trades done on 1st May, 1996, which was posted on Wednesday
(1st May 1996) by the member reached the client at Barmer, the client immediately
called up the dealing office of the member and clarified that the transactions
mentioned in the contract were not ordered by him. When the member informed the
client about further transactions done in his name on the 2nd day of the settlement
(2nd May 1996, Thursday), and 3rd day of settlement (3rd May 1996, Friday), the
client was surprised and he flatly negated that he had not (sic) done any such
transaction as he clarified that he had hardly / not attended office or was not involved
 14

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
in his day to day business activities during the said period due to the election
activities going on in the country and he was busy in studying the election scenario of
the country (between 1st May 1996 to 7th May 1996).
(9) The client M/s Sethia Investments further claimed that he had not phoned for
placing the orders from his office premises or his residence. The member had no
other choice but to conclude that the said phone calls had been made by a cheater or
any other mischievous person who with the intention to deceive the member gave
orders / instructions which were telephonic to the authorised dealers of the said
member in the deceptive identity of being Babulal Sethia the so called representative
of M/s Sethia Investments. Due to long distance calls it was not possible to easily
identify the voice of Mr. B. L. Sethia by the dealer staff of the member which further
resulted in execution of the orders by dealers without any reason for suspicion on the
caller. Assessing the gravity of the situation the Management came into action to put
the things right and to find out the identity of the person who had deceived the
member by calling in the name of the client of the member M/s Sethia Investments.
(10) Meanwhile, at the end of the third day of the settlement which was the last
working day of the week for markets i.e. Friday (3rd May 1996) and there being two
consecutive holidays for the market i.e. on Saturday (4th May 1996) and on Sunday
(5th May 1996) which were two very fatal days for the markets as the election were
being conducted at many places. The political uncertainty of the Election Results took
its toll on the markets which ultimately led to the markets falling 25% to 30% in Kerb
Deals which resulted in the market opening very low and falling further on the
following day i.e. on Monday (6th May 1996). This resulted in the Member to call an
emergency Board Meeting and to take joint decision of the Board of Directors of the
company that all the transaction outstanding in the name of the client M/s Sethia
Investments should be squared off by using the best judgment and by incurring
minimum losses to the Member and that a team of Directors be sent to the said place
i.e., Barmer, Rajasthan for investigation of the true facts and to bring to the
conclusion as to who was responsible for the said orders placed with the Member
during the market time.
On the last day of the settlement i.e., on 7th May 1996 the outstanding position standing in the name
of the client M/s Sethia Investments was squared off so as to avoid any defaulting, as the same, if
not squared would have led to taking of delivery of the said outstanding purchases quantity of shares
having a value of more than 4 crores rupees which would have been nearly 3 times the net worth of
the company. Thus to avoid pay in problems and to avoid huge losses in auction of these shares on
non-payment, the Board of Directors of the Member Company decided that it has to suffer the loss
for the moment as there was a very clear indication from the said client namely, M/s Sethia
Investments that it was not concerned in any way with the transactions executed by the Member on
this behalf as the same was never given by him or from his office or his residence. [Emphasis
supplied]
 15

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
(ii) Notably, the singularly important statement, Due to long distance calls it was not possible to
easily identify the voice of Mr. B. L. Sethia by the dealer staff of the member which further resulted
in execution of the orders by dealers without any reason for suspicion on the caller, does not
mention the date and approximate time of the call when the difficulty in identifying the voice of the
caller claiming to be Sethia first arose. More important, nothing is stated in this narration if the
dealer in charge made any verifying enquiries when he was unable, because of the call being a
long-distance one, to identify form the voice of the caller if he was indeed Sethia and, if so, what the
said callers response was to satisfy the dealer about the genuineness of his identity as Sethia, as a
result of which the dealer accepted and executed his (the callers) orders for very large purchases.
Thirdly, according to this narration, the main reason the complainant had suspicion was because
huge quantity was outstanding on the 3rd day of settlement. On a plain reading, this sentence would
mean that there was hardly any suspicion about the caller not being Sethia till the 3rd day of the
settlement period, i.e., 03.05.1996 when the outstanding position of the client became very high. We
need to observe here that the mere fact that there was a huge outstanding position against this client
at the end of the third day of the settlement period (settlement no. 18 from 01.05 to 07.05.1996)
could not have been, by itself, the reason for arousing suspicion about the clients identity. That, in
fact, the dealer concerned did not have any suspicion about the identity of the caller after it was
understood that it was a long distance call is obvious from the next part of the same sentence, viz.,
which further resulted in execution of the orders by dealers without any reason for suspicion on the
caller.
(iii) Further, there is no statement in this narration that when the so-called Sethia called up on
03.05.1996 to place further orders, the dealer asked him for any additional margin or that Sethia
said he would remit any additional sum. Secondly, though the narration states that during the
market hours of 03.05.1996 the complainants representative called Sethia to seek confirmation of
the orders placed and ask for higher margin money, once again there is no mention of the time of
the call. Moreover, there is no claim that a second attempt was made to call Sethia on that day later
during the market hours when he could not be contacted in the first call.
(iv) Reading together the contents of paragraphs (8) and (9) of the narration (portions underlined,
in particular) it is also clear that from the conversations with Sethia in the after-market hours of
03.05.1996 the complainants trader came to a clear conclusion that the latter had been deceived by
some cheat or mischievous person in believing that the telephone calls of 01-03.05.1996 were from
Sethia and accordingly executing orders of purchase and sale of shares on his (and Nahatas) behalf)
during that period. The important point here is the unambiguous affirmation that this conclusion
had been reached after the telephone conversations that Sethia had with Manoj Chandaliya and
Pramod Chandaliya in the after-market hours of 03.05.1996 itself.
 16

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
(v) The last sentence in paragraph (9) and the underlined narration in paragraphs (10) and (11) also
convey distinctly that the Board of Directors of the complainant met, for the first time, sometime on
06.05.1996 to consider the consequences of the deals of 01-03.05.1996. The Board decided to square
up the deals on best judgment basis so as to cause minimum loss to the company; this was because
the Board recognised that to avoid being forced to take delivery of the outstanding (bought) shares
worth nearly 3 times the net worth of the company it had no alternative but to suffer the loss for the
moment in squaring up the deals. This was also because there was very clear indication from the
client M/s Sethia Investments was in no way concerned with the transactions in question. The
Board also decided that a team of Directors should be sent to Barmer to further investigate into the
matter and find out who was responsible for the orders placed during the said period.
(b) The complainant furnished some additional documents and details to the surveyor in support of
its claim of deception by some unknown person in the months of July August 1996 but there was no
addition to any of the statements made in the first information report so far as the sequence of
events and the content of the narrations noticed/reproduced above are concerned. In other words,
these statements in the first information report were the material that constituted the sole basis of
the complainants claim for indemnification of its alleged loss under the insurance policy.
(c) Keeping the background detailed in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) above in sharp focus, we may
now turn to read what the complainant said in this context in its complaint filed full 3 years after the
events of 01 07 May 1996:
12. On 01.05.1996 one person using the name of Mr Sethia of Barmer rang up the
complainant company and wanted to place orders for purchase of shares. Since it was
a long distance call, the terminal user could not fully recognize the voice of the caller.
However, the person calling mentioned about previous deals done by Mr. Sethia,
details of demand draft sent to the complainant a week back and about internal
marking being done for Mr. Nahata, which marking is peculiar and applicable to this
client only.
After hearing all these details from the caller, the terminal user was satisfied that the caller was Mr.
Sethia only, otherwise caller could not have given these details. Hence, the orders for purchase of
shares were entered into NSE terminal and same got executed.
13. On 02.05.1996 the terminal user again received calls from the person who had the same voice as
on 01.05.1996. The caller told the terminal user that he was Sethia speaking and wanted to place
further orders for purchase of shares. Since the voice of the caller was the same as that on
01.05.1996, the terminal user received orders for purchase of shares from him. Consequently, the
terminal user entered these orders into the NSE terminal and same got executed. Similarly, on
03.05.1996 the terminal user received calls from the person whose voice as that on 01.05.1996. Then
 17

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
the caller again placed the orders for purchase of shares. The same orders were entered into NSE
terminal and got executed. As per usual practice the contract note for the said transaction executed
on 01.05.1996, 02.05.1996 and 03.05.1996 were sent to Mr. Sethia on the respective dates by
courier. These orders during the period from 01.05.1996 to 03.05.1996 were pertaining to three
companies namely, SBI (N) TISCO and Reliance and were received and executed by the terminal
user Mr. Manoj Chandaliya. The summary of the orders for purchase of shares as placed by the
caller and copies of the on line trade confirmation report of NSE are collectively annexed hereto and
marked as Annexure P 9 to P 10 respectively.
14. When the daily confirmation / contract notes for trades done on 01.05.1996, which were sent by
courier on Wednesday i.e. 01.05.1996 reached Mr. Sethia at Barmer on 03.05.1996, he immediately
called up the dealing office of the complainant in Pune and said that the transactions mentioned in
the contract were not ordered by him. When Sethia was informed about further transactions done in
his name on 2nd and 3rd May 1996 also Sethia was surprised and he flatly denied having done any
such transactions. Mr. Sethia informed Mr. Pramod Chandaliya, Director that he had hardly
attended his office and was not involved in his day to day business activities during the said period
of 01.05.1996 to 03.05.1996 due to the election activities going on in the country and he was busy in
studying the election scenario of the country. Mr. Sethia further affirmed that he had not phoned for
placing the orders on any day during May 1996.
(d) The differences between the two versions in the narration of each significant detail relating the
events during 01 03.05.1996 are remarkable: it is as if by some magic, the individual and collective
recall of each participant on the complainants side became graphic after the lapse of 3 years.
(1) Thus, the version in the first information report merely states, Due to long distance calls it was
not possible to easily identify the voice of Mr. B. L. Sethia by the dealer staff of the member which
further resulted in execution of the orders by dealers without any reason for suspicion on the caller.
It also states, The fact that a huge quantity was outstanding on the 3rd day of settlement was the
main reason to arise (sic arouse) suspicion about the clients (sic clients) outstanding position. The
member then immediately contacted the client during the market hours of the 3rd day of the
settlement to confirm his outstanding position and to request him to send additional margin for
keeping the position outstanding. However, as the client was not available the member could not
confirm the outstanding position with him.
(2) As against this, the complaint states, On 01.05.1996 one person using the name of Mr Sethia of
Barmer rang up the complainant company and wanted to place orders for purchase of shares. Since
it was a long distance call, the terminal user could not fully recognize the voice of the caller.
However, the person calling had mentioned about previous deals done by Mr. Sethia details of
 18

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
demand draft sent to the complainant a week back and about internal marking being done for Mr.
Nahata, which marking is peculiar and applicable to this client only. After hearing all these details
from the caller, the terminal user was satisfied that the caller was Mr. Sethia only, otherwise caller
could not have give these details. Hence, the orders for purchase of shares were entered into NSE
terminal and same got executed.
(e) The embellishments in the narration of the same sequence of events (leading to ascertaining the
identity of the caller of 01.05.1996 claiming to be Sethia) in the affidavit filed by Manoj Chandaliya,
complainants trader in question in 2008 (i.e., 12 years after the events) are even more remarkable.
(f) What, however, remains wholly unexplained and hence detracts seriously from the credibility of
these successive improvements is the reason for non-disclosure of these crucial details on this issue,
if indeed true, in the first information report itself.
9 (i) It is clear from an unrebutted Table in the surveyors report that the complainant purchased
shares worth over Rs. 1.42 crore for Sethia (and Nahata) on 01.05.1996; over Rs. 2.19 crore on
02.05.1996 and nearly Rs. 1.98 crore on 03.05.1996, i.e., nearly Rs. 5.6 crore over just 3 days. The
cumulative outstanding (bought) positions were over Rs. 1.36 crore on 01.05.1996, over Rs. 3.03
crore on 02.05.1996 and over Rs. 5.01 crore on 03.05.1996. The complainants claim towards the
loss finally booked on 07.05.96 after squaring up the outstanding position was over Rs.43 lakh
because of these specific trades done over 3 days (01-03.05.96). By any standard, this is indicative of
sudden and extremely large volumes of trade for an individual (or, a proprietary firm).
(ii) Though specifically required under the above-mentioned clause of the member-constituent
agreement, the complainant has not averred anything to show how it satisfied itself, either initially
or at any time later leave alone continuously - about the financial soundness of Sethia or his
proprietary firm so as to engage in share purchases of such amounts. On the other hand, as pointed
out in the surveyors report, a stock broking company like the complainant, managed by a group of
well-informed and educated persons, did not require Sethia, as part of the NSE-mandated
regulations, to deposit and maintain requisite margin money with the complainant, though
admittedly Sethia was barely a month-old client.
(iii) The complainant has sought to repel this point in its rejoinder by stating that Sethia had
deposited a demand draft for Rs. 4.25 lakh on 22.04.1996, which adequately covered the net loss of
the trades done on behalf of Sethia and Nahata (on marked to market basis) even after the decline in
the share prices on 02.05.1996. A few facts need consideration in this context. First, the marked to
 19

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
market basis of calculation (i.e., working on the basis that the liability at the end of a days trading is
represented by the differential amount of the purchase price and the closing price of the shares in
question and not the absolute amount of the purchase price) is at best a partial criterion for
determining margin requirements. If this were to be the only criterion, it can be easily seen that any
investor could buy lakhs of expensive shares involving crores of rupees during a day without any
margin deposit whatsoever if the share price remained stable: for example, a person who without
any margin deposit with the complainant could place order for, say, SBI (N) shares worth Rs.
5000/- in a day could also place orders for purchase of the same shares worth Rs. 50 lakh, on the
assumption of stable share price because the differential between the purchase price and the closing
price would then be zero, requiring no additional margin deposit by the logic of marked to market,
as interpreted in the affidavit of Manoj Chandaliya. It may be further noticed that the purchase of
shares in the account of Sethia (including Nahata) during 01-03.05.1996 was overwhelmingly of
SBI-New (SBI-N) and TISCO. The average market price of SBI-N declined form Rs. 307.38 on 01.05
to Rs. 295.95 on 02.05 and to Rs. 289.93 on 03.05.1996, i.e., by nearly Rs. 17 per share. The market
price of TISCO also declined but not so sharply (from Rs. 245.80 to Rs. 239.98). In support of the
large purchase (60,000 shares) of SBI-N even on 03.05.1996 (on top of 40,000 and 60,000 shares
bought on 01 and 02.05.1996 respectively) despite the account of Sethia being seriously in the
negative, the complainants rejoinder merely states, On 3.5.96 when still larger orders were placed,
the dealer asked the caller to remit additional margin money. Due to the distance involved and the
satisfactory financial conduct in the past, the dealer had to allow some time to the client to make a
remittance and therefore orders were executed in the meantime. The fact is that the dealer also did
not anticipate that prices could fall by Rs. 20 in SBI and by Rs. 20 in TISCO between 3.5.96 to next
working day 6.5.96. [Emphasis supplied]
(iv) The point that emerges clearly from the foregoing statement is that though by the end of trading
on 02.05.1996 the dealer was acutely aware of the extremely tenuous position of funds in Sethias
credit balance, he still went ahead with the transactions on 03.05.1996, mainly in the hope that
things would be better when the market improved on the next working day. There was surely no
intention of taking delivery of such a large number of shares. If this is not speculation, we wonder
what would be. The speculative aspect becomes even more obvious if we note that during this period
the complainant itself purchased on its own account large number of shares of SBI-N and TISCO (in
addition to RELIANCE). It is not before us if the complainant also suffered losses on account of its
own trades in these two shares, in addition to what it claims to have suffered on account of the
alleged deception, and if so, how much. However, the conclusion of almost wanton speculation
during the 3-day period is inevitable.
(v) On the point of satisfactory financial conduct in the past of Sethia, the copy of the Ledger of M/s
Sethia Investments (for the period 01.04.1996 27.07.1996) filed by the complainant shows some
interesting facts. The ledger has no entry of any debit or credit or of any balance upto 07.04.1996.
The first entry is of 08.04.1996 (a Monday) showing a credit of Rs. 18,169.27. There are two deposits
by Sethia of Rs. 30,000/- each on 15.04.1996 (the next Monday). Between 15.04 and 22.04.1996, the
credit balance of (+) Rs. 78,169.27, however, turns into a debit balance of (-) Rs. 37,771.43, on
 20

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
account of some non-delivery trades. It is at this stage that a deposit Rs. 4.25 lakh is made by Sethia,
credited to his account on 24.04.1996. [Note: The complainant has enclosed with the rejoinder
affidavit a copy of Sethias letter of 11.04.1996 sending the two deposits of Rs. 30,000/- each, to
demonstrate that Sethia did not have a fax connection over which the former could seek
confirmation of contract notes. However, for reasons best known to the complainant, it has not
produced on record a copy of Sethias letter, if any, sending the remittance of the comparatively
much larger deposit of Rs. 4.25 lakh. Be that as it may]. On 24.04.1996 itself, the credit balance was
reduced to Rs. 3,87,228.97 because of a payment liability (bill) of Rs. 38,366.98 pertaining to
settlement no. 15. The credit of Rs. 21.55 lakh approx. because of trades during settlement no. 16
were more than offset by the debit of more than Rs. 24.47 lakh because of payments due for the
same period though the two entries have been so arranged date-wise (hopefully, truly) that the
credit entry is of 29.04.1996 whereas the debit is of 03.05.1996 though the credit and debit pertain
to sale/purchase transactions in the same settlement period, i.e., no. 16. Very strangely, there are no
entries of either credit or debit pertaining to settlement no. 17, the period immediately preceding the
settlement period in question, i.e., no.
18. This, then, was the basis of the complainants affirmation of the satisfactory financial conduct in
the past of Sethia (and Nahata, taken together) so much so that the complainant went ahead with
purchases worth crores of rupees on their behalf during a short, 3-day period beginning 01.05.1996.
This has to be read carefully with reference to the clause in the member-constituent agreement
quoted earlier. Moreover, both in the complaint and in the rejoinder, the complainant has
highlighted the availability of the margin cover of over Rs. 3 lakh because of the deposit of Rs. 4.25
lakh by Sethia on 22.04.1996. However, it has kept completely quiet on the reality of this margin,
which is seen to be rather fictitious in view of the ledger entries discussed above.
10 (i) The complainant has tried to explain the time taken in filing the claim with OP 1 (rather, the
first information report with the NSE with copy to OP 1, because no separate claim application is on
record) on two grounds. First, it took time upto 01.06.1996 to crystallise the loss due to deception
and secondly, the Certificate of Insurance (CoI) issued by OP 1 to the complainant (and available
with it right from the start) did not give sufficient details of the procedure for filing claims.
Therefore, the complainant had to obtain those details from the NSE, which too took time after
01.06.1996. As a result, the complainant was able to file the claim with OP 1 on 30.06.1996, which
was within 30 days of crystallisation of the loss.
(ii) What the complainant stated in this regard in its first information report needs to be read
carefully. The following was stated:
REASONS FOR DELAY AND REQUEST FOR CONDONATION OF DELAY IN
REPORTING THE MATTER TO THE INSURANCE COMPANY AND NSE AND THE
ACTION TAKEN PURSUANT TO THE DECEIPT The member company and its
 21

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
Directors where (sic were?) in a state of shock and disbelief when they realized that
the transactions on which loss was incurred was not belonging to its client. Further
they could not reconcile as to how they would be able to pay of such huge losses from
its own resources to the NSE. Also as explained before they had sent a team of its
Directors to Barmer (1st visit), for investigating the identity of the person who had
placed the orders with the member in the name of the client. The team took one
complete week (7th May 1996 to 12th May 1996) to assess the situation at Barmer by
ascertaining from the client whether he had really placed the orders or not. However,
the client reiterated that he had never placed the orders. The team took the following
actions at Barmer:
(a) Visited the office and residence of Mr. B L Sethia Proprietor M/s Sethia
Investments to ascertain the facts of the case and to see co-operation to identify the
person who could have deceived the member company in his name.
(b) Met the Pancha (respected persons), Friends/ Relatives/ Employees of Mr
Sethia of the Barmer town to explain them the matter and sought their help in
identifying the person who could have placed the orders on behalf of Mr. Sethia.
(c) Visited the Barmer Police Station and enquired about the credit worthiness
of Mr. B. L. Sethia and asked for their co-operation in sorting out the matter.
(d) Visit the Telephone Exchange/ Telephone Public Call Booths and enquired
about the probable calls made from those places at the offices of Member company at
Pune by the Deceiver.
Assurances were given by all the above parties that they would help in identifying the said deceiver
in a fortnights time and most of them opined that Mr. B. L. Sethia was a man of integrity and he
being an advocate and respected person would not have been involved in any mischievous acts.
After making all the enquiries and ascertaining the facts the team of Directors and the member
company concluded that the Member company was deceived by an unidentified person by
representing in the name of the client i.e. M/s Sethia Investments. In such a situation the Board of
Directors of the company immediately called up a meeting and taking stock of the situation a
resolution was passed that as the transaction has already been squared off and loss have been
booked and pay-in being due on 14th May 1996, and the team having arrived only on 12th May 1996
the Member did not had (sic have?) any time to think in terms of reporting to the exchange or the
insurance company as the same are situated at Bombay and it would have taken time to prepare all
the documents required for placing of the said claim. Thus now the Member had two alternatives
namely:
Option
 22

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
(a) To default on the Exchange or, Option (b) To make the pay-in of the Deceived
person loss by borrowing funds from outside parties.
EVENTS DATES Settlement Period N/1996018 1st to 7th May 1996 First Board Meeting for
Squaring of Transactions 4th May 1996 Visit by the team of Directors at Barmer 7th to 12th May
1996 Second Board meeting for taking following decisions:
(i) to raise loan from outside parties
(ii) not to default with the exchange
(iii) to claim loss from Insurance Company and notify to exchange after
receiving confirmations from Barmer persons 12th May 1996 Funds Pay-in date of
N/1996018 14th May 1996 Visit by the Chairman to Barmer after fortnight 27th May
to 31st May 1996 Date of Final Discovery and Crystallisation of Loss 31st May 1996
Claim date as per guidelines within 30 days of date of discovery of loss 30th June
1996 Then it was unanimously decided by the Board of Directors to opt for the
second option due to time shortage and not to default on the National Stock
Exchange and thus they decided to raise loans from outside private parties to pay up
its liability to the exchange. It was further decided in the Board meeting that the
Member would claim its loss from the Insurance Company and notify the Exchange
after confirmations is received from the various people whom the team had met in its
1st visit at Barmer that identity of the deceiver/ caller cannot (sic could not?) be
ascertained.
For coming to the conclusion about identity of the deceiver, the Chairman of the company visit (sic -
visited?) Barmer (2nd visit) (27th May 1996 to 1st June 1996) to make the final assessment and his
visit concluded that the identity of the deceiver cannot (sic could not?) be ascertained. [Emphasis
supplied] Thus, the visit of the Chairman for his personal fact-finding on 27.05.1996 was not
contemplated even at the meeting of the Board of Directors of the complainant held on 12.05.1996.
(iii) We may also notice that the CoI issued by OP 1 (as produced by the complainant) states, inter
alia, the following:
IMPORTANT CONDITIONS
1. In the event that the Insured becomes aware of any loss sustained, or any
circumstances which may give rise to a claim, or any reasonable cause for suspicion
of fraud, dishonesty or forgery on the part of any Employee, the Insured must notify
the Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. at the address given below in writing as soon as
possible and in any event, not later than 30 days after discovery. FAILURE TO DO
SO WOULD AFFECT THE INSUREDS RIGHTS UNDER THE POLICY.
 23

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
2. The Insured must not make any admission of any liability, in respect of, nor offer
to settle, any claim for which Indemnity may be sought under this policy, without the
prior written consent of the Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. [Emphasis supplied] 11 (i)
On the tenability of the grounds advanced by the complainant to explain the delay,
some observations are in order. The word crystallisation of the loss, repeatedly used
in the complaint and the rejoinder, is a semantic invention of the complainant. The
CoI or the master policy document does not even once mention this word. The CoI is
absolutely clear that when the insured becomes aware of any loss having been
sustained; it must notify the insurer as soon as possible and in any event, not later
than 30 days after discovery (of the loss).
(ii) Undoubtedly, the event of deception was clear to the complainant latest by 04.05.1996 and the
amount of loss from the transactions during 01-03.05.1996 was established by the end of trading on
07.05.1996. Thus, even from the limited details in the CoI, available with the complainant from the
start, it was very much in the complainants knowledge that it would have to notify the loss to OP 1 as
soon as possible and, in any event not later than 30 days from 07.05.1996 that is, if it believed that
this was indeed a genuine case of deception, covered by Section 1 (c) of the insurance policy. It is no
doubt a stretched argument for the complainant to contend that with a view to ascertaining the facts
in the alleged circumstances it was necessary for it to enquire further with Sethia and the time spent
on the enquiries at Barmer between 08.05 and 11.05.1996 was thus necessary. Still, this argument is
not entirely implausible. However, the claim that even after the company had actually paid up the
loss in squaring up the deals the Chairman of the company was not satisfied with the findings of his
younger brothers (and Directors of the company) and, therefore, decided to make a further
fact-finding trip of his own to Barmer, full 16 days after that of his brothers, defies all logic and
credibility as an explanation for further loss of time. This, in our view, could not have been the
conduct of a prudent person in the responsible position of the Chairman of the Board of Directors of
a diligent and professionally managed company, which had suffered a large loss because of
deception by either a new client or some unknown person. That is, if the loss was indeed through
deception.
12. If we ask the question as to what would have been the normal conduct of the management of a
stock broking company, which genuinely concluded, after careful consideration by its Board of
Directors, that it had been deceived in the course of a set of transactions that it had just carried out
in good faith, some answers emerge. In our view, the first step that such a company (or person)
would take after coming to such a conclusion is to see if the insurance policy that it had availed of
covered the peril that it had faced (assuming that the insured did not know the full details of the
master policy till then as the CoI was only a summary document). It would, therefore, make urgent
enquiries with the NSE or OP 1 or both regarding the detailed terms and conditions of the policy, the
perils covered, the stipulated procedure, required documentation, etc., for filing a sustainable claim.
It would, simultaneously and quite irrespective of the requirement or otherwise of the insurance
 24

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
policy, also lodge a complaint with the Police, because such a deception (cheating by personation) is
not an event that a set of ordinary individuals, howsoever well qualified and adept at dealing in
stocks, would be competent or required to enquire into and hope to unravel it is a criminal offence
under section 416 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). If the alleged sequence of events were true, it
might also involve abetment and/or criminal conspiracy, punishable under appropriate section(s) in
Chapters V and VA of the IPC. The management of the complainant company was surely aware of
this. If it had any doubt as to who should lodge such a complaint with the Police, the stockbroker
itself or the NSE or the insurance company, or whether the first information report contemplated in
the insurance policy was in lieu of a Police FIR, once again the management of such a company
would at least immediately enquire with the NSE management, obtain clarification/advice if
necessary, in writing - and act accordingly. Such a company would also take these steps in quick
succession, particularly if it had paid up the loss by raising loans. In this case, the complainant did
nothing of the kind. It kept thunderingly quiet for over a fortnight since 12.05.1996 for there is no
averment of any action between 12.05.1996 and 27.05.1996. It was only on 28.05.1996, out of the
blue as it were, that the Chairman of the complainant company decided to go to Barmer for the
second, his personal, enquiry.
13. Even after the Chairmans return to Mumbai, the company took over 30 days to file its first
information report, on the plea that it had to obtain the details of the insurance policy and claims
procedure from the NSE. In this context, we note some additional facts brought on record. Of
course, the period allowed for filing an insurance claim in case of loss due to deception was 30 days
from the date of awareness of the loss. However, the question that needs to be asked is: was it
normal conduct of a company in this position to wait for the full period of 30 days to file the first
information report, even if the loss crystallised only on 01.06.1996 according to its reckoning? We
are unable to find a reasonably acceptable answer for the delay in filing the first information report
with the NSE, particularly in view of the clear stipulation in the CoI that not intimating the
insurance company within 30 days of becoming aware of the loss would affect the rights of the
insured under the policy. Incidentally, the complainant has produced a letter purportedly written on
02.06.1996 to the NSE asking for a copy of the master policy issued by OP 1 this is obviously with a
view to demonstrating that it did not have a copy of the master policy till then. There is no mark of
NSEs office acknowledgement on this letter nor is on record any subsequent letter of NSE
forwarding a copy of the master policy. We may also observe that 02.06.1996 was a Sunday!
14. Apart from mentioning, inter alia, the sections insured, which were covered by the policy, the
CoI does not indeed spell out the details of the insured perils nor does it give a summary of the
claims procedure. It merely records, for example, Section 1 Legal Liability for inability to complete
transactions for specified perils COVERED. Clearly, therefore, the complainant, having availed of
the insurance policy at the directive of the NSE and received only the CoI was expected to obtain, as
soon as possible, a copy of the detailed policy document that also included the claims procedure. In
fact, that would be the immediate response of an average stockbroker of ordinary prudence because,
as it stood, the CoI did not ex facie disclose these crucial details. The NSE circular, which detailed
the rationale for obtaining a single master policy compulsorily covering all members of the NSE,
 25

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
also advised its Members, The insurance indemnity cover will be provided on a Master Policy basis
issued to the National Stock Exchange of India Ltd. but the cover would be in respect of each
Trading Member who will be issued individual certificate of insurance by the OIC. The copy of
Master Policy will be available for inspection with the National Stock Exchange of India Ltd. once
the same has been issued by the OIC.
15 (i) The CoI issued to the complainant was for the period 19.10.1995 31.05.1996. It is not the case
of the complainant that though it enquired soon thereafter with the NSE, it could not ascertain the
details of the insurance policy, as OP 1 had not furnished the Master Policy to the NSE. On the other
hand, it is an admitted position that by 04.05.1996 the complainant had concluded with reasonable
certainty that the transactions during 01-03.05.1996 purportedly on behalf of Sethia were the result
of a deception. The complainant was able to precisely quantify the loss after squaring up the
transactions by 07.05.1996. In the teeth of these facts, however, the complainant would have us
believe that though aware of a large loss by deception by 07.05.1996, it was unaware upto
02.06.1996 that the insurance policy could cover such a loss. Alternatively, that though conscious
after 07.05.1996 about coverage of the loss under the policy, it could not file the requisite
details/papers with the NSE and OP 1 as it had to necessarily spend over three weeks thereafter on
enquiries to verify (and re-verify) the truth of the deception, the identity of the deceiver and to
crystallise the said loss. It was so busy in that extremely diligent exercise of
deceiver-identification-cum-loss-crystallisation (coupled with concerns as to how to pay up for the
loss) that it was altogether unable to even commence the process of ascertaining the detailed terms
of the insurance policy and the claims procedure until 01.06.1996. Even thereafter, it took the
complainant considerable time to ascertain the details of the policy and claims procedures. We are
not at all persuaded that this could be even remotely, leave alone was, the factual position.
(ii) We may also notice a small fact, completely unexplained. The first information report to the
NSE, narrating the event of deception and raising a claim for indemnification of the loss, was signed
by a Director of the company and is dated 31.05.1996. Yet, the forwarding letter to the NSE (and OP
1) enclosing the same first information report and signed by the same Director is dated 30.06.1996.
What was the complainant doing with the fully-completed first information report dated 31.05.1996
already signed by a Director that it actually took the complainants same Director to sign the
forwarding letter a full one month letter? Commonsense would suggest that the complainant, having
already finalised its first information report on 31.05.1996, did not find it expedient and/or
convenient to lodge this report soon thereafter as it was engaged during the whole of June 1996 in
such activities relating to the claim as it could not afford to disclose in its complaint against OP 1. It
also follows that these activities could not be such as to advance and establish a bona fide claim.
 26

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
(iii) Therefore, in our view, the complainants conduct over the period from 08.05 to 30.06.1996 can
have only one rational explanation. Sethia and/or the complainant engaged in highly speculative
trades during 01-03.05.1996 that resulted in a large loss. The complainant knew that it was not a
case of deception by someone impersonating Sethia. However, because the complainant did not
quite follow the procedure laid down by the NSE to accept and execute orders for transaction with
Sethia, it found it impossible to bring Sethia to own up these deals and face the consequences. The
complainant then tried its level best to persuade Sethia to share at least, a part of the loss but failed.
It was only then that the complainant realised, most likely after enquiries with persons concerned,
that it could make out a possible case for an insurance claim on the ground of deception by an
unknown person.
16. We may notice a few more facts/circumstances that arose after the complaint was filed:
(i) In 2008, during the proceedings before us, the complainant brought on record an
(evidence) affidavit of Babu Lal Sethia as well as affidavits of its Directors concerned.
Unfortunately, this long lapse of time in bringing necessary evidence on record is due
to the processes in this Commission.
Be that as it may.
(ii) Sethias affidavit averred that Nahata was a client of his. Thus, the said Nahata was not a client of
the complainant. We have already seen from the NSE trade records produced by the complainant
that this position notwithstanding and despite the absence of a member-constituent agreement
between the complainant and Nahata, the former actually executed substantial deals in the name of
Nahata: the computer-generated records reflect that there was no difference in recording the trades
in the name of Sethia and in the name of Nahata. If at all there was a confidential system of
distinguishing between the deals for Sethia and those for Nahata, as averred in the complaint and
the subsequent affidavits, why should the trade records produced by the complainant show the
names of Sethia and Nahata separately against specific trades? And, if Nahata was indeed a client of
Sethia, why should the NSE record of trades produced by the complainant show the name of Nahata
under the column of Client A/c?
(iii) Even after over 12 years of the transactions in question, Sethia states in his affidavit of June
2008 that he received the contract note of the transactions of 01.05.1996, by courier, from the
complainant at about 3.30 pm on 03.05.1996 (vide paragraph 8 of the affidavit). His recollection is
thus phenomenal. Even more phenomenal is Sethias recollection of the precise, abbreviated
numbers (namely, 14, 15, 16 and 17) of the NSE settlements when he did good volume of business
with the complainant (vide paragraph 5 of the affidavit). Also notable in this context is the fact that
 27

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
the complaint filed in 1999 (vide paragraph
10) also refers to these NSE settlements by the same numbers.
(iv) According to Sethias affidavit, on 10.05.1996, during the visit of Pramod and Kiran Chandaliya
to Barmer, there were some heated exchanges and they as well as Sethia went to the Police Station,
Barmer. However, at the intervention of one Sohan Lal, they did not file a Police complaint. They all
decided so because Sohan Lal said, the Police could do hardly anything in this matter as there was
nothing to prove that Sethia had placed the orders and thereafter they all returned to have a joint
meeting. Pramod Chandaliya, in his affidavit of July 2008, says the same thing with the added
revelation, We tried to provoke Mr. Sethia through some heated exchanges on 10.05.1996 so that he
could say something in our favour if he had done the transactions and during the process had asked
him to come to the Police Station, Barmer also. We all went up to the Police Station Thus, the two
Chandaliya brothers were rather easily dissuaded from filing the Police complaint, despite their
bona fide belief that there was a deception, if not by Sethia then some unidentified person and,
according to Sethia, thereafter they all came back to have a joint meeting. However, we find from the
complainants first information report (vide paragraph D (c)) to the NSE that at Barmer, the team of
Directors of the company visited the Barmer Police Station and enquired about the creditworthiness
of Mr. B. L. Sethia and asked for their cooperation in sorting out the matter. Thus, in the affidavit,
there is no mention whatsoever if Pramod Chandaliya had already been to the Barmer Police Station
for the specific purposes mentioned in the first information report, for he and his brother Kiran
could possibly not have made enquiries with the Police about the creditworthiness of Sethia in the
latters presence when they jointly went to the Police Station on 10.05.1996 after a heated exchange.
(v) A specific statement has been made in the complaint: As far as Mr. Sethia is concerned with this
deception, all the issues had been clarified over telephone and during two visits by Director and
Chairman of the Complainant Co. and therefore no further correspondence with Mr. Sethia was
required to be exchanged. In this context, we once again refer to the ledger account (for the period
01.04 27.07.1996) of Sethia produced on record. The loss because of the transactions during
01-03.05.1996 allegedly in the name of Sethia alias deceiver was quantified at over Rs. 43 lakh and
apparently recorded in a separate account. Sethias ledger account, however, shows a debit entry of
Rs. 24,47,721.99 on 03.05.1996. Further, on 06.05.1996, there is a credit of Rs. 1,12,761.53 in the
account, leaving a credit balance of Rs. 2,07,715.65 as on that date. Finally, there is a debit entry of
Rs. 21,996 dated 08.07.1996, with a longish explanation reading, To Dena Bank (Kalbadevi Road)
(Being amount paid of Tisco (10000) towards Short Delivery Sett. No. A/16 of Sethia Inv towards
Penalty charges). Thus, after this debit, Sethia had a credit balance of Rs. 1,85,719.65, according to
this ledger account. We wonder how the complainant treated this credit balance eventually, if there
was no communication with Sethia after May 1996. The statement quoted above is of course
carefully worded: it is about closure of further exchange of correspondence with Sethia as far as the
loss because of this deception was concerned. In other words, correspondence/dealings with Sethia
 28

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
continued even after the incident of deception, albeit in respect of other matters. Now, the question
arises: would a stockbroker continue any commercial contact at all with some person because of
whom, in one way or the other, the stockbroker had recently suffered a large loss? The ordinary view
would be not to continue any contact unless of course some superior, long-term advantage was
perceived in doing so. That such an advantage was availed of in 2008 is obvious from the clearly
procured affidavit of Babu Lal Sethia produced on record by the complainant.
(vi) It is in the backdrop these acts and circumstances that the surveyors observation in its report of
October 1996 acquires added relevance:
2. An alleged deceiver cannot expect to gain monetarily as any profit from false
orders will accrue to the client in whose name he has placed the orders and not to
him. 4. In our considered opinion, the obvious and most likely scenario therefore
appeared to be a client or possibly the insured, engaged in speculative trading and
having incurred losses as the market moved adversely, thereby (sic) denied having
placed the orders at all.
17. The claim for indemnification of the loss was clearly under PART I IN & OUT
INDEMNITY Section 1 (c). The relevant provisions of the policy read as under:
Whereas the Assured, as defined herein, have paid, or agree to pay, the premium as
consideration for this Part of the Policy, The Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. (hereafter
called the Underwriters) agree to indemnify the Assured in the manner stated, as set
out in the Schedule to have been incurred or sustained by reason of any of the
following insured events: -
SECTION 1 Legal Liability for which the Assured shall become liable pursuant to the
following Indian Regulatory Authorities (including any rules, regulations or bye-laws,
legislations made by the Government of India or such bodies constituted by it in the
exercise of their statutory powers):-
The Securities and Exchange Board of India and/or National Stock Exchange of India
Ltd.
Indemnity is hereby afforded to the Assured for the Assureds legal liability to third
parties (including Clients of the Assured) caused by the Assureds inability to
complete transactions due to:-
(a) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
 29

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
(b) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
(c) the Assured having been deceived as to the identity of any person for the purpose
of buying or selling of Securities anywhere in the world. [Emphasis in (c) supplied]
The Legal Position 18 (i) It is settled law (vide MacGillivray on Insurance law, p. 516,
Eleventh Edition) that the burden of proving that the loss was caused by a peril
insured against is on the assured. Therefore, to be eligible, under Section 1 (c) of the
insurance policy for indemnification of a loss claimed to have been suffered, the
assured would need to:
(a) have carried out the transaction(s) of buying/selling of the securities in question
in accordance with the rules, regulations, bye-laws, etc., of the SEBI and/or the NSE
and establish, if questioned, that it (the assured) actually carried out the said
transactions in accordance with the said rules, regulations, etc.; and
(b) also establish that the loss was on account of the insured peril, i.e., it (the assured)
was indeed deceived as to the identity of a person in carrying out the said
transactions, which led to the loss.
(ii) No need to emphasise that the assured would further have to state the amount of
the loss and support it with documentation, evidence, etc., which would enable a
surveyor appointed under section 64 UM of the Insurance Act, 1938 to assess the
loss.
19. A contract of insurance is based on the doctrine of uberrima fides, i.e., utmost good faith, in the
conduct of the insured. This doctrine was enunciated as far back as in 1766 by Lord Mansfield in the
celebrated case of Carter v Boehm [(1766) 97 ER 1162, 1164] in the following words:
Insurance is a contract of speculation...
The special facts, upon which the contingent chance is to be computed, lie most
commonly in the knowledge of the insured only; the underwriter trusts to his
representation, and proceeds upon confidence that he does not keep back any
circumstances in his knowledge, to mislead the underwriter into a belief that the
circumstance does not exist... Good faith forbids either party by concealing what he
privately knows, to draw the other into a bargain from his ignorance of that fact, and
his believing the contrary.
 30

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
20. The Supreme Court has employed and interpreted this doctrine in several cases. Thus:-
(i) In the case of P. C. Chacko v Chairman, Life Insurance Corporation of India
[(2008) 1 SCC 321], the Apex Court dealt at length with the import and applicability
of the above-mentioned doctrine in the context of section 45 of the Insurance Act,
1938, governing life insurance.
(ii) In the case of United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v Great Eastern Shipping Co. Ltd.
[(2007) 7 SCC 101], the Court was mainly concerned with interpretation of the
Institute Cargo Clause of a marine insurance policy. The issue was in respect of scope
of the terms coverage and extended coverage with reference to the location of the
insured goods where the peril affecting those goods occurred. It appears to us that
the Courts reference in this case to the uberrima fides doctrine was only to the extent
mentioned in the judgment of a Constitution Bench of the Apex Court in the case of
General Assurance Society Ltd. v Chandmull Jain [(1966) 3 SCR 500].
(iii) In United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v Pushpalaya Printers [(2004) 3 SCC 694],
the Court, while discussing the interpretation of the term impact, referred to the said
doctrine in the following words, A Constitution Bench of this Court in General
Assurance Society v Chandmull Jain has expressed that (AIR p. 1649, para. 11) In a
contract of insurance there is requirement of uberrima fides, i.e., good faith on the
part of the assured and the contract is likely to be construed contra proferentem, that
is, against the company in case of ambiguity or doubt.
(iv) The case of LIC of India v Smt. G.M. Channabasamma [(1991) 1 SCC 357] was
also one of application of section 45 of the Insurance Act, 1938 to a life insurance
policy. The Apex Court inter alia observed:
It is well settled that a contract of insurance is a contract uberrima fides and there
must be complete good faith on the part of the assured. The assured is thus under a
solemn obligation to make full disclosure of material facts which may be relevant for
the insurer to take into account while deciding whether the proposal should be
accepted or not. While making a disclosure of the relevant facts, the duty of the
insured to state them correctly cannot be diluted. Section 45 of the Act has made
special provisions for a life insurance policy if it is called in question by the insurer
after the expiry of two years from the date on which it was effected. Having regard to
the facts of the present case, learned counsel for the parties have rightly stated that
this distinction is not material in the present appeal. If the allegations of fact made on
 31

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
behalf of the appellant Company are found to be correct, all the three conditions
mentioned in the section and discussed in Mithoolal Nayak v Life Insurance
Corporation of India must be held to have been satisfied. We must, therefore,
proceed to examine the evidence led by the parties in the case.
21. Though this point does not appear to have been specifically amplified in any case before the Apex
Court, it is our considered view that to be consistent with the law laid down by the Apex Court as
well as the international legal framework relating to insurance, the doctrine of utmost good faith
must pervade the entire range of conduct of both the assured/insured and the insurer all through
the life of an insurance contract. For, it can be no bodys case that while the parties to an insurance
contract must be held answerable to this doctrine in making the contract, i.e., the insured putting up
its proposal for the insurance and the insurer in issuing the policy, they would be exempt form
conduct adhering to this doctrine at some later stage of the contract, say, in filing a claim for
indemnification of a loss or in examining it.
22 (i) We need to also bear in mind another dimension of adjudicating complaints relating to claims
for indemnification of loss under an insurance policy. The Consumer Fora established under the Act
derive jurisdiction to adjudicate such matters only on the ground of deficiency in service on the part
of the insurer. [Note: There is of course a further dimension of involvement of commercial purpose,
as dealt with in this Commissions judgment and order of 03.12.2004 in the case of Harsolia Motors
v National Insurance Company Limited [(2005) 1 CPJ 27 NC]. This judgment is, however, under
challenge before the Apex Court]. In dealing with deficiency in service, it is thus salutary to bear in
mind the general principles laid down by the Apex Court in the case of Ravneet Singh Bagga v KLM
Royal Dutch Airlines [(2001) 1 SCC 66]. In this case, the Apex Court, while considering an appeal
against the order of this Commission in a complaint involving alleged negligence on the part of the
above-mentioned Airline, agreed with the view taken by this Commission and ruled as under:
6. The deficiency in service cannot be alleged without attributing fault, imperfection,
shortcoming or inadequacy in the quality, nature and manner of performance which
is required to be performed by a person in pursuance of a contract or otherwise in
relation to any service. The burden of proving the deficiency in service is upon the
person who alleges it. The complainant has, on facts, been found to have not
established any willful fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in the service
of the respondent.
The deficiency in service has to be distinguished from the tortious acts of the respondent. In the
absence of deficiency in service the aggrieved person may have a remedy under the common law to
file a suit for damages but cannot insist on grant of relief under the Act for the alleged acts of
commission and omission attributable to the respondent which otherwise do not amount to
deficiency in service. In case of bona fide disputes no willful fault, imperfection, shortcoming or
 32

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
inadequacy in the quality, nature and manner of performance in the service can be informed (sic -
inferred?). If on facts it is found that the person or authority rendering service had taken all
precautions and considered all relevant facts and circumstances in the course of the transaction and
that their action or the final decision was in good faith, it cannot be said that there had been any
deficiency in service. If the action of the respondent is found to be in good faith, there is no
deficiency of service entitling the aggrieved person to claim relief under the Act. The rendering of
deficient service has to be considered and decided in each case according to the facts of that case for
which no hard and fast rule can be laid down. Inefficiency, lack of due care, absence of bona fides,
rashness, haste or omission and the like may be the factors to ascertain the deficiency in rendering
the service. [Emphasis supplied].
(ii) Thus, to succeed in this complaint, the complainant would have to establish deficiency in service
on the part of OP 1 in repudiating the claim of the complainant.
23 (i) OP 1 repudiated the claim of the complainant on the following three grounds:
1. Claim was lodged on 1.7.96 i.e. more than 30 days after the incident and
crystallisation of the loss on 7.5.96 and not immediately.
2. The Member constituent agreement with the client was not executed on stamp
paper duly notarised, which is not as per NSE/SEBI rules and falls under Policy
exclusion.
3.
Client codes were not entered on several occasions by your office at the time of trading but entered
subsequently and also not for all trades. This practice is also not as per NSE rules.
(ii) The detailed discussion of the facts and circumstances above show beyond any trace of doubt
that the claim was filed well beyond the specified period of 30 days from the date of
discovery/awareness of the loss due to the share trades carried out by the complainant during
01-03.05.1996 and that there was no reason for this inordinate delay which could be held to be
reasonable, bona fide and sufficient. The complainant, from its unambiguous admissions in the first
information report, became fully aware of the loss and its exact amount latest by 07.05.1996. The
most charitable interpretation of the entire exercise thereafter of trying to ascertain the identity of
the so-called deceiver (who allegedly ordered, in the name of Babu Lal Sethia, the purchases of
shares on telephone from Barmer during 01-03.05.1996) by sending a team of two Directors to
Barmer and later on the Chairman of the complainant company undertaking another sudden trip,
allegedly to Barmer is that the complainant was trying to minimise the loss by exploring if Sethia
could somehow be persuaded to own up a part of the deal. There was no case whatsoever of all this
 33

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
time being unavoidable to crystallise the loss. In any event, the complete inaction in the last 15 days
of May 1996 is altogether unexplained and, as we have seen, even the Board of Directors meeting on
14.05.1996 did not contemplate or authorise a second fact-finding visit by the Chairman to Barmer
(vide para 10 (ii) p. 35 supra). The time taken in June 1996 is also not explained as we have seen, the
signed copy of the first information report is actually dated 31.05.1996 and we are not persuaded
that the date is a mere typographical error. The insurance company, OP 1 had to base its decision
regarding the delay on the facts narrated in the complainants first information report. On that basis,
OP 1 committed no deficiency in service in concluding that the delay was uncondonable.
(iii) The complainant has sought to make much of its contention that the member constituent
agreement (with M/s Sethia Investments) need not have been executed on stamp paper and even if
use of stamp paper was necessary, there was no requirement of either SEBI or the NSE to get the
agreement notarised. In contesting the complaint OP 1 has not been able to demonstrate if the
execution of a member constituent agreement on stamp paper and its notarization were indeed
mandated by the NSE regulations. However, we find from the papers filed by the NSE before us in
response to our direction in this regard that the complainant itself was urged and advised (albeit by
a letter of 21.04.1997, i.e., well after the dates relevant to this complaint (April May 1996) to execute
proper Member-Constituent Agreements as per the Exchange requirements when it was brought out
in an inspection of the complainants operations since October 1995 that Agreements entered into
with constituents were not stamped. This shows that it was very much a requirement of the NSE to
execute the agreements with constituents on stamp paper though the requirement of getting them
notarised might not have been there.
(iv) In respect of the last ground of repudiation, the complainant has again tried to make most of a
loosely worded sentence. It is true the NSE had not made it mandatory to enter specific client codes
in execution of client orders during May 1996, i.e., the relevant period. However, the essence of the
ground is not so much the phrase client code, as is obvious from a reading of the sentence as a
whole. The true import is that the complainant failed to enter the details of the client(s) on whose
behalf the individual trades were executed at the time of executing the trades and that the details
were recorded in hand subsequently and were thus amenable to either inadvertent error or
manipulations, which was clearly against the regulations of the NSE. In the case of entries in
question, we are unable to see why the complainants trader failed to record either Sethia or Nahata
in any of the trades executed on 01.05.1996 though these words were recorded against all entries of
trades of 02.05 and 03.05.1996. The so-called priority of actually executing the trades and hence not
finding time to make the entry of the clients detail does not convince us because this priority of
executing trade could not be only for 01.05.1996.
 34

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
(v) Thus, we are unable to find any element of Inefficiency, lack of due care, absence of bona fides,
rashness, haste or omission (vide Apex Court order in the Ravneet Bagga case excerpted above) on
the part of OP 1 in citing the foregoing grounds of repudiation of the complainants claim.
(vi) On the other hand, as discussed above in detail there is ample evidence of lack of even ordinary
good faith, leave alone utmost good faith in the conduct of the complainant. It did not comply with
the regulatory requirements of the NSE in doing trades on behalf of Nahata under the garb of his
being a client of Sethia. Though in its first information report the complainant merely stated that it
did not have any suspicion about the caller not being Sethia once it was pointed out to and realised
by the trader that it was long distance call, (vide p. 20-21 portions of extracts underlined) it went to
great lengths in the complaint and later the affidavits to import additional unverifiable details to
improve its version that the trader was deceived on this account. It failed to register a complaint
with the Police after finally concluding about the alleged deception and even after doing so at the
instance of the surveyor, continued to persist with the absurd position that it was for the NSE
and/or the insurance company and not the complainant to file such a complaint with the Police. It
failed to exercise due diligence and care in executing very large trades on behalf of a very new client
without any margin money worth the name and, in fact, went to great lengths to justify how
according to its own interpretation of the marked to market basis of calculation, there was sufficient
margin in favour of Sethia till the end of trades on 02.05.1996. It spun a long, most unacceptable
yarn about its being able to crystallise the loss only on 01.06.1996 as against 07.05.1996 and then
waited for full one month to file its first information report with the NSE on 30.06.1996. Insofar as
Nahata was not a duly recognised client of the complainant, the complainant could not, if it were
acting in utmost good faith, have included the losses incurred in the trades attributed to Nahata in
its insurance claim. Thus, in our view the complainant not only did not display utmost good faith in
its conduct but also failed to discharge the burden of proof in respect of its claim.
24. In conclusion, we find no deficiency in service on the part of the Opposite Party no. 1, Insurance
Company in repudiating the complainants insurance claim and dismiss the complaint as being
totally devoid of merit or good faith.
Sd/-
.
[R. C. JAIN, J] sd/-
..
 35

M/S Crown Consultants (P) Ltd. vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. on 31 May, 2011
[ANUPAM DASGUPTA]
 36