Monnet Ispat & Energy Ltd vs C.C.E., Raipur on 22 December, 2009
Monnet Ispat & Energy Ltd vs C.C.E., Raipur on 22 December,
2009
CUSTOMS EXCISE & SERVICE TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL,
West Block No.2, R.K.Puram, New Delhi
COURT-IV
Date of hearing/decision: 22.12.2009
Central Excise Appeal No.142 of 2008-SM
Arising out of the order in appeal No.201/RPR-I/2007 dated 9.10.2007 passed by the Commissioner (Appeals), Central Excise, Raipur (C.G.).
For Approval and Signature:
Hon(cid:18)ble Mr. Rakesh Kumar, Member (Technical)
1
Whether Press Reporter may be allowed to see the Order for publication as per Rule 27 of the CESTAT (Procedure) Rules, 1982?
2
Whether it should be released under Rule 27 of CESTAT (Procedure) Rules, 1982 for publication in any authoritative report or not?
3
Whether their Lordships wish to see the fair copy of the Order?
Seen
4
Whether Order is to be circulated to the Departmental authorities?
Yes
Monnet Ispat & Energy Ltd. (cid:5) Appellant
Vs.
C.C.E., Raipur (cid:5). Respondent
Appearance:
Shri K.K.Gupta, Advocate for the appellant Shri M.K. Rastogi, Authorized
Departmental Representative (DR) for the Revenue Coram: Hon(cid:18)ble Mr. Rakesh
Kumar, Member (Technical) Oral Order No.____________________ Per Rakesh
Kumar:
The facts leading to this appeal are as under:
 1

Monnet Ispat & Energy Ltd vs C.C.E., Raipur on 22 December, 2009
1.1 The appellant manufactured sponge iron and other iron and steel products
chargeable to central excise duty under Chapter 72 of the Central Excise Tariff Act
and they also avail Cenvat credit of duty on various inputs , capital goods and input
services in terms of Cenvat Credit Rules, 2004. The Department issued a show cause
notice dated 3.11.2006 seeking to deny service tax credit amounting to Rs.4,36,650/-
and its recovery along with interest and also imposition of penalty on the appellant
under Rule 15 of the Cenvat Credit Rules. The Assistant Commissioner vide order in
original dated 23.2.07 allowed the cenvat credit of Rs.3,98,142/- but disallowed the
cenvat credit of Rs.38,510/- in respect of the services of (cid:19)Marine Inland Transit
Insurance(cid:20) in connection with the procurement of plant and machinery of the
captive power project, (cid:19)money insurance for money in transit from the factory to
bank to & fro(cid:20), (cid:19)insurance for personnel working in the appellant(cid:18)s factory in the
case of accident or loss(cid:20); (cid:19)the follow-up services in connection with installation of
plant and machinery of captive power plant (cid:19) and, telephone services in respect of
telephones installed at the residence of General Manager and Company(cid:18)s guest
house. The Assistant Commissioner vide order in original dated 23.2.2007,
confirmed the Cenvat credit demand of Rs.38,510/- along with interest and imposed
penalty of Rs.25,000/- on the appellant under Rule 15 (1) of Cenvat Credit Rules,
2004. On appeal, the Commissioner (Appeals) vide impugned order in appeal No.
201/RPR-I/2007 dated 9.10.2007 upheld the Assistant Commissioner(cid:18)s order. It is
against this order, that the present appeal has been filed by the appellant.
2. Heard both sides.
3. Shri K.K. Gupta, Advocate, the learned Counsel for the appellant, pleaded that the
services of transit insurance for plant and machinery, insurance for money in transit
from factory to bank to & fro, and the insurance of the personnel working in the
appellant(cid:18)s factory for injury to employees in the case of accident, are the services
availed in connection with the activities relating to business whose cost forms part of
the cost of finished products and hence as per the ratio of the Tribunal (Larger
Bench) decision in the case of C.C.E., Mumbai V vs. GTC Industries Ltd. reported in
2008 (12) STR 468 (Tri-LB), these services have to be treated as input services, that
as per the definition of input service, the inward transportation of inputs or capital
goods is specifically covered in the definition of input service, that when inward
transportation of inputs is covered by the definition of input service, the transit
insurance would also be covered, that the follow-up services are business auxiliary
services availed in connection with installation of captive power plant which is very
much covered by the definition of input services; that telephone services installed at
the residence of general manager or in the guest house had been used in connection
with business operation and hence are eligible for Cenvat Credit and the insurance of
money in transit is also an essential service relating to day to day business and hence
the same has to be treated as input service , that in view of this all these services are
covered by the definition of (cid:17)input service(cid:18), that the Tribunal in the case of Finolex
Cables Ltd. vs.C.C.E., Pune I reported in 2009 (14) STR 303 (Tri-Mumbai) had held
 2

Monnet Ispat & Energy Ltd vs C.C.E., Raipur on 22 December, 2009
that insurance services in respect of plant and machinery is expenditure which goes
into the costing and hence service tax on insurance premium for plant and machinery
would be admissible as cenvat credit and that the Tribunal in the case of Millipore
India Ltd. vs. C.C.E., Bangalore II reported in 2009 (236) ELT 145 (Tri-Bang.) has
held that medical and personnel accident policy and group personnel accident policy
are the items considered for costing of the final product in terms of CAS -4 and,
therefore, these services have to be treated as services received in relation to the
manufacture of final product and would be covered in the definition of input service.
Shri Gupta also pleaded that one of the ground for denial of cenvat credit in respect
of transit insurance policy for the plant and machinery for captive power plant is that
the plant and machinery is meant for generating electricity for captive use and since
the electricity does not attract any central excise duty, no cenvat credit would be
available in respect of any services used for bringing and installation of the captive
power plant and machinery the ground for denial of cenvat credit is wrong as the
electricity generated by the captive power plant is used in or in relation to the
manufacture of dutiable final product and therefore, just because electricity
generated does not attract any central excise duty. Cenvat credit of service tax on the
transit insurance of plant and machinery cannot be denied, and that in this regard, he
relies upon the Board(cid:18)s Circular No.665/56/2002-CX dated 25th September 2002
wherein it has been clarified that cenvat credit in respect of capital goods used in
manufacture of intermediate goods exempt from payment of duty which are used
captively in the manufacture of finished goods chargeable to duty cannot be denied.
4. Shri M.K.Rastogi, learned Departmental Representative, pleaded that the services
for being eligible for cenvat credits must be used in the factory in relation to
manufacture of finished product, that marine inland transit insurance was in respect
of transportation of plant & machinery, that the insurance policy for the money in
transit from the factory to bank to & fro cannot be said to be in relation of
manufacturing activity, that the (cid:19)follow-up services(cid:20) for installation of plant and
machinery of captive power plant are also not in relation to manufacture of the
finished goods and similarly, the telephone services in respect of telephones installed
at the residence of general manager and the company(cid:18)s guest house cannot be said to
have been used in or in relation to the manufacture of finished product. As regards
the services of insurance of persons working in the Appellant(cid:18)s factory for injury in
loss of life due to accident he pleaded that this insurance is in respect of workers
supplied by the contractor who are not the employees of the Appellant. He ,
therefore, pleaded that cenvat credit in respect of these services had been rightly
denied.
5. I have carefully considered the submissions from both sides and perused record.
Service tax credit of Rs.23,460/- has been denied in respect of marine inland transit
insurance availed for insurance of the captive power plant during transportation from
the supplier(cid:18)s premises (BHEL) to the appellant(cid:18)s premises. When inward
transportation of input or capital goods is specifically covered by the definition of
 3

Monnet Ispat & Energy Ltd vs C.C.E., Raipur on 22 December, 2009
(cid:17)input services(cid:18), the insurance during inward of the transport of capital goods would
also be covered. In view of this, I hold that the appellant is eligible for cenvat credit of
service tax on the insurance premium for the transit of the machinery from the
supplier(cid:18)s premises to the appellant(cid:18)s premises.
5.1 As regards the Revenue (cid:17)s plea that the power plant had not been used for
manufacture of dutiable finished goods but had been used in the generation of
electricity which is not excisable , this is not a valid ground for denial of cenvat credit
as the power plant is meant for generation of electricity which, in turn had been used
in or in relation to the manufacture of dutiable finished products.
6. As regards the cenvat credit of service tax on the premium for insurance policy for
money in transit, which is for insurance of the money in transit from the factory to
the bank to and fro, , I am of the view that this is a part of the activity relating to
business of the appellant, as any prudent business man requiring cash for day to day
operations would arrange its insurance during its transit from the factory to the bank
and back to the factory. I therefore, hold that service of insurance of money in transit
is covered by the definition of (cid:19)Input Service(cid:20).
7. As regards the follow-up services, that same are business auxiliary services availed
by the appellants in connection with installation of captive power plant. Since these
services are in connection with installation of captive power plant and since the
services in relation to setting up or modernisation are specifically by the definition of
input service , I hold that these services are also eligible for cenvat credit.
8. As regards the service tax in respect of telephone services installed in the residence
of general manger and company(cid:18)s guest house, the appellant have not shown as to
how these services are in relation to his manufacturing business, or in or in relation
to manufacture of finished goods. The use of these telephones may be substantially
for non-business purposes also while for being covered by the definition of (cid:17)input
service(cid:18) the service availed must be in or in relation to manufacturing business of the
Assessee. Service tax credit in respect of telephone services in respect of telephone
installed in the G.M.s residence and the company(cid:18)s guest house has, therefore, been
rightly denied.
9. As regards the cenvat credit of service tax on the premium for insurance of the
personnel working in the appellant factory, the learned Departmental Representative
pleads that this insurance is for drivers, security man employed through contractors
and they are not the employees of the appellant(cid:18)s factory and hence, the cenvat
credit of service tax in respect of accident insurance for them would not be available.
The appellant(cid:18)s plea is that as per the provisions of Factory Act, the appellant as
principal employer has vicarious liability for any compensation in the case of injury
etc. to even contract workers and for this reason, the accident insurance covered is
provided even to the workers supplied by the contractors. I agree with the
 4

Monnet Ispat & Energy Ltd vs C.C.E., Raipur on 22 December, 2009
appellant(cid:18)s plea in this regard. As per the Tribunal(cid:18)s judgement in the case of
Millipore India Ltd., medical and personnel accident policy, group personnel
accident policy etc. are covered by the definition of (cid:19)input service(cid:18)(cid:20) and cenvat
credit of service tax is available. In view of this, I hold that appellants are eligible for
Cenvat credit of service tax on the insurance premium for the insurance of the
personnel working in the factory.
10. In view of the above discussion, except for the portion of the impugned order
upholding the denial of cenvat credit taken in respect of telephone services, in respect
of telephone installed at the residence of the General Manager and at the Appellant(cid:18)s
guest house, the rest of the order upholding the cenvat credit demand by denying
cenvat credit in respect of marine inland transit insurance, money insurance for
money in transit from bank to factory to & fro, follow up services in connection with
installation of plant & machinery of captive power plant and insurance of personnel
working in the factory for accident or loss and upholding the penalty on the
Appellant, is set aside.
11. The appeal stands disposed of as above.
(Rakesh Kumar) Member (Technical) scd/
 5