K. Surappa vs V. Venkatesha Reddy And Others on 17 November, 1995
K. Surappa vs V. Venkatesha Reddy And Others on 17
November, 1995
Equivalent citations: 1997ACJ482, AIR1996KANT258, ILR1996KAR1186,
1996(1)KARLJ534, AIR 1996 KARNATAKA 258, (1997) ACJ 482 (1996) 1 KANT
LJ 534, (1996) 1 KANT LJ 534
JUDGMENT
1. This appeal is filed by the claimant for compensation for injuries sustained by him in an accident
against the judgment and award of the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal rejecting his claim.
2. The petitioner who is a police constable was deputed for election work on 7-3-1971 in booth No. 12
at Harihar in connection with the general elections. On 7-3-1971 at about 9.30 p.m. when he was
returning with other staff in bus bearing No. MYY 3122 belonging to the present first respondent
and driven by the second respondent before the Tribunal the vehicle dashed against a road side tree
and a nearby temple and then capsized. The petitioner alleged that that accident took place due to
rash or negligent driving of the bus by its driver and that he sustained injuries in that accident. The
petitioner had earlier made a claim petition in M.V.C.11/72, but as there was mis-description of the
owner the petitioner got that application dismissed and filed this present petition. The Deputy
Commissioner, Chitradurga District, who had requisitioned the bus for election purposes as well as
the Election Commission were impleaded as respondents 3 and 4 respectively. The insurer of the
bus was impleaded as the 5th respondent. The Union of India was also impleaded as party.
3. The first respondent, the owner of the vehicle, in his objections contended that in view of the
dismissal of the earlier petition in MVC.11/72 the present application was not maintainable, that on
the date of the accident the vehicle in question was not in his possession and the driver was not in
his employment as the vehicle had been commandeered by the Deputy Commissioner for carrying
election boxes and officials and it was actually the Deputy Commissioner who was the de-facto
owner of the vehicle at that time and the driver was under his control and direction. He also pleaded
that the accident did not take place due to any rash or negligent driving of the vehicle but due to
some mechanical defect. The second respondent, Deputy Commissioner, denied that the accident
took place due to rash or negligent driving of the bus by the driver and pleaded that the claim was
barred by time and that the Election Commission of India was a necessary party since the bus was
commandeered for election purposes. The Election Commission of India while denying the
averments that the petitioner was deputed for election work or that that accident took place in the
manner alleged by the petitioner contended that they are not necessary parties to the petition as the
Government of India has to bear the expenses of the election.
4. The Union of India had not filed any objections. The insurer took up the plea that the accident
took place due to a mechanical defect and further pleaded that as the bus had been commandeered
by the Deputy Commissioner for election purposes which was outside the scope of the cover granted
tinder the policy, the respondent was not responsible to pay any compensation. It also took up the
 1

K. Surappa vs V. Venkatesha Reddy And Others on 17 November, 1995
plea that the present claim was barred in view of the dismissal of the earlier claim in M.V.C.1I/72.
5. The Tribunal on a preliminary point had held that the present claim petition was not
maintainable in view of the dismissal of the earlier petition in M.V.C.11/72. This Court in
M.F.A.1023/78 set aside that order and directed the Tribunal to proceed to consider the application
for condonation of delay as well as the claim petition in accordance with law.
6. After recording evidence the Tribunal has condoned the delay in making the claim petition
holding that the claimant had made out sufficient cause for the delay. The Tribunal also has held
that the accident took place due to rash or negligent driving of the bus by, its driver and that the
claimant who was travelling in the vehicle on duty sustained compound fracture of both bones of left
leg and another simple fracture. The Tribunal also found that there was no evidence of permanent
disability. On the material on record the Tribunal has held that the claimant would be entitled to
compensation of Rs.20,000/-.
7. While dealing with the question as to who was liable to pay the compensation the Tribunal has
held that as the bus had been requisitioned by the Deputy Commissioner for election purposes and
as the evidence indicated that the bus was under the control of the election officer and the driver
was receiving instructions from the officer, there was no relationship of master and servant as
between the first respondent-owner and the driver and that on the other hand the driver must be
deemed to have been in employment of the election officer. The Tribunal has therefore held that the
first respondent who is the owner of the vehicle as well as fifth respondent-insurer are not liable to
pay, the compensation. So far as the liability of the Deputy Commissioner, Election Commission and
the Union of India is concerned the Tribunal has held that the vehicle had been requisitioned for
holding elections, that as the vehicle was being used for a sovereign function of the State, the State is
entitled to exemption from liability for tortious act committed by the driver. In the result the
Tribunal has dismissed the claim petition.
8. The learned counsel for the appellant-claimant contended that the finding of the Tribunal that the
relationship of master and servant between the first respondent and his driver had been suspended
when the vehicle had been requisitioned by the Deputy Commissioner is not correct, that under the
provisions of the Representation of the People Act ('the R. P. Act' for short) the owner of the vehicle
is entitled to the fare by way of compensation and that the relationship between the driver and the
owner of the vehicle must be deemed to have subsisted. He next contended that if it is to be held
that the driver was driving the vehicle on behalf of the Government then the finding that the State is
not liable for the tortious act of the driver as the State has got sovereign immunity is not correct.
9. On the material on record it is now established or undisputed that the bus in question which
belongs to the first respondent was requisitioned by the Deputy Commissioner for election purposes
under the provisions of S. 160 of the R. P. Act. It is also not disputed that the second respondent
before the Tribunal had been employed by the first respondent as the driver of the vehicle and that
the said second respondent was driving the vehicle when the accident took place. The finding of the
Tribunal that the accident took place due to rash or negligent driving of the driver has not been
challenged.
 2

K. Surappa vs V. Venkatesha Reddy And Others on 17 November, 1995
10. The Tribunal has held that as the vehicle had been requisitioned by the Deputy Commissioner
and as the petitioner admitted in his evidence that the bus was in the control of the election officer
and the driver was proceeding as instructed by the election officer, there was temporary cessation of
relationship of master and servant between the first respondent and the driver and that at the time
of the accident it cannot be said that the driver was driving the vehicle in the course of his
employment under first respondent for first respondent's benefit.
11. If the person driving a vehicle at the time of the accident was an employee of the owner of the
vehicle, generally it would be presumed that the driver was driving it in the course of his
employment. The owner who wants to get over his liability for the negligence of the driver has to
establish that there was cessation of relationship of master and servant between him and the driver
at the relevant point of time. The question is whether on the facts of this case the Tribunal was
correct in holding that the relationship of master and servant between the first respondent and the
driver came to an end or was suspended when the vehicle was requisitioned by the Deputy
Commissioner.
12. Section 160 of the R. P. Act authorises the Government to requisition any vehicle which is likely
to be needed for the purpose of transport of ballot boxes or members of the police force to and from
the polling station. The mere fact that the vehicle ' is requisitioned by the Deputy Commissioner
under the above statutory provision, does not lead to the inference that the driver of the vehicle
ceased to be the employee of the owner nor does it indicate that the owner ceased to have interest in
the vehicle.
13. Section 161(2) of the R. P. Act stipulates that the Government should pay hire for the vehicle on
the basis of the fare or rates prevailing in that locality for such vehicle. If the owner of the vehicle is
aggrieved by the amount of compensation, he is given the right to apply to the State Government for
referring the matter to an arbitrator. As such it is not as if the vehicle is taken from the owner free of
cost. Virtually the vehicle is taken on hire by the Government when it is requisitioned under S. 160.
It should be noted that S. 160 only contemplates requisitioning the vehicle and not the services of
the driver. It is because the owner is entitled to claim hire charges for the vehicle by way of
compensation he sends his driver to drive the vehicle requisitioned. When the owner of a vehicle
gives his vehicle on hire along with the driver the relationship of master and servant between him
and the driver does not get suspended nor does it come to an end. It is the master who has to pay the
wages of the driver even for the period for which the vehicle is given on hire, unless under the terms
of the agreement the hirer is required to pay the wages of the driver and the hire charges payable to
owner are only in respect of the vehicle. When the vehicle along with the driver is taken on hire for a
temporary period and there is no stipulation that the hirer should pay the wages of the driver then
the mere fact that the vehicle would be under the control of the hirer or the driver is required to take
the vehicle to the places where the hirer wants it to be taken, the driver does not cease to be the
employee of the owner of the vehicle. The person who takes the vehicle on hire would not become
the employer of the driver merely because he can give instructions to the driver as to when or where
the vehicle is to be taken. In the Law of Torts by Rathanlal and Dhirajlal, 21st Edition, at page 109,
while discussing the subject "Lending of Servant"
 3

K. Surappa vs V. Venkatesha Reddy And Others on 17 November, 1995
there is a reference to the decision in Mersey Docks and Harbour Board v. Coggins &
Griffith (Liverpool) Ltd., (1946) 2 All ER 346, and other decisions on the subject. The
relevant passage reads as hereunder :
"... In Mersey Docks and Harbour Board v. Coggins & Griffith (Liverpool) Ltd. the
appellants let out their crane and driver to the respondent Stevedores under a
contract providing that the driver shall be servant of the respondent. The crane driver
by his negligence injured a person giving rise to the question as to who was the
master at the time of the accident for purposes of vicarious liability. All the Courts
held that there was no transfer of the servant and the appellants continued to be the
master and were, therefore, liable for the negligence of the servant. Lord Porter in his
speech in the House of Lords pointed out that an arrangement for the transfer of the
services of the servant from one master to another can take place only with his
express or implied consent and that it is not legitimate to infer that a change of
masters has been effected because a contract has been made between the two
employers declaring whose servant the man employed shall be at a particular
moment in the course of his general employment by one of the two. He then observed
: 'The most satisfactory test, by which to ascertain who is the employer at any
particular time, is to ask who is entitled to tell the employee the way in which he is to
do the work upon which he is engaged. If someone other than his general employer is
authorised to do this, he will, as a rule, be the person liable for the employee's
negligence. But it is not enough that the task to be performed should be under his
control, he must also control the method of performing it. It is true that in most cases
no orders as to how a job should be done are given or required : the man is left to do
his own work in his own way. But the ultimate question is not what specific orders, or
whether any specific order, were given but who is entitled to give the orders as to how
the work should be done. Where a man driving a mechanical device, such as a crane,
is sent to perform a task, it is easier to infer that the general employer continues to
control the method of performance, since it is his crane and the driver remains
responsible to him for its safe keeping. In the present case, if the appellant's
contention were to prevail, the crane driver would change his employer each time he
embarked on the discharge of a fresh ship. Indeed, he might change it from day to
day without any say as to who his master should be and with all the concomitant
disadvantages of uncertainty as to who should be responsible for his insurance in
respect of health, unemployment and accident.' Although this was a case where a
machine was let out with a man, the same principle has been followed when man
alone is sent for doing another's work. In the words of Lord Denning, M.R.: 'Just as
with employers who let out a man with a machine, so also with an employer who
sends out a skilled man to do work for another, the general rule is that he remains the
servant of the general employer throughout.' Indeed in the House of Lords decision
in Mersey Docks and Harbour Board's case was followed by the Privy Council in
Bhoomidas v Port of Singapore Authority, (1978) 1 All ER 956 (PC), where a gang of
Stevedores in the general employment of the Port Authority of Singapore was hired
out to a ship for loading a cargo of planks from the wharfside and a member of the
 4

K. Surappa vs V. Venkatesha Reddy And Others on 17 November, 1995
gang was injured by the negligence of another member of the gang. Although this was
a case where only men without any machine were sent to work for another, the Privy
Council held that the principle was the same and the general employers faced a
"formidable" burden which they failed to discharge that there was transfer of services
of the gang to the ship."
..... ..... .....
"Where a vehicle is let out on hire with the service of a driver, and an accident occurs
through the negligent act of the driver causing personal injuries to a third person, one
test for determining who is the master for purposes of vicarious liability, is the
answer to the question -- whether the driver in doing of the negligent act was
exercising the discretion given to him by his regular employer, or whether he was
obeying a specific order of the hirer for whom, on his employer's direction, he was
using the vehicle. Ordinarily, when a vehicle is hired with its driver, the driver
continues to exercise his own discretion which has been vested in him by his regular
master. But, if the hirer intervenes to give directions as to how to drive for which he
possesses no authority and the driver pro hac vice (for the occasion) compile with
them and an accident occurs resulting in an injury to the third party, the hirer is
liable as joint tortfeasor and the general employer is not liable."
On the same subject the following passage is found in Winfield and Jolowicz on Tort, Thirteenth
Edition at page 567 :
"In such cases, the burden of proof, which is a heavy one and can only be discharged
in exceptional circumstances rests on A, the general or permanent employer, to shift
the prima facie responsibility for the negligence of B, on to the hirer, C, who for the
time being has the advantage of B's services. A distinction is to be drawn between
cases where a complicated piece of machinery and a driver are lent, and cases where
labour only, particularly where it is not of a highly skilled character, is lent. In the
former case, it is easier to infer that the general employer continues to control the
method of performance since it is his machinery and the driver remains responsible
to him for its safe keeping. In the latter case it is easier to infer that the hirer has
control not merely in the sense of being able to tell the workman what he wants done,
but also of deciding the manner of doing it.
The question whether A or C is liable depends on many factors; "who is paymaster,
we can dismiss, how long the alternative service lasts, what machinery is employed,
have all to be kept in mind." But in cases of this kind the courts have generally
adhered to the view that the most satisfactory test, if it can be applied, is, who at the
particular time has authority to tell B not only what he is to do, but how how he is to
do it. It is a question of fact involving all the circumstances of the case. C may control
the particular task to be performed, but he is not liable unless he also controls the
method of performing it. If C, though he has no authority to do so, expressly directs B
 5

K. Surappa vs V. Venkatesha Reddy And Others on 17 November, 1995
to do the act which is negligently done and causes damage, C is generally liable with B
as a joint tortfeasor, but A is not liable. A term in the contract between A and C that B
shall be the servant of C on the particular occasion is not conclusive but such a
contract may entitle A to claim indemnity from C for the damages he has had to pay
to X."
The principle of law referred to above applies even in a case where the vehicle is requisitioned under
the provisions of statute and the hire charges are paid by way of compensation and the owner of the
vehicle deputes his driver to drive the vehicle. All that the evidence of the petitioner shows is that
driver was under the control of election officer and that the driver was driving the bus in accordance
with the instructions given by the election officer. This answer given by the petitioner cannot be
taken to mean that actually the election officer was instructing the driver as to how he should drive
the vehicle. The meaning to be attached to that statement of the petitioner, which was given in
Kannada, is that he was following the instructions of the election officer with regard to when the bus
was to be taken or where it has to be taken. On this material on record it cannot be said that the
driver had become the employee of the election officer or that he ceased to be the employee of the
first respondent. In fact the first respondent has not adduced any evidence to show that he was not
required to pay the wages of the driver during that period. On the other hand S. 161 of the R.P. Act
only contemplates paying compensation equivalent to the fare payable in that locality to the owner
of the vehicle and does not contemplate wages payable to the driver of the vehicle. As such the
finding of the Tribunal that there was cessation of relationship of master and servant between the
first respondent and the driver during the period of the requisitioning of the vehicle cannot be
sustained. It must be held that the driver continued to be employee of the first respondent and that
the first respondent is vicariously liable for the rash or negligent driving of the bus by the driver. In
view of this conclusion it is not necessary to go into the question whether the State can claim
sovereign immunity for the tortious act of the driver of a vehicle.
14. So far as the liability of the insurer is concerned the policy is marked as Ex. D5 and it shows that
the policy was in force as on the date of the accident. By collecting additional premium of Rs.234/-
endorsement No. 13 has been issued and under that endorsement the liability of the insurer is
limited to a sum of Rs. 5,000/- in respect of any one person and to a sum of Rs. 75,000/- in respect
of any number of claim in connection with any one accident. The only objection which has been
raised by the insurer with regard to its liability namely that as the vehicle had been commandeered
for election purposes it is not liable to pay the compensation has been rightly negatived by the
Tribunal. The Tribunal has pointed out that such defence is not permissible under S. 96(2) of the
Motor Vehicles Act. It is unfortunate that the appellant who sustained injuries in the accident which
took place in 1971 has not been able to get any compensation even after a lapse of nearly a quarter
century. Taking into consideration this circumstance I feel this is a fit case where he should be
awarded interest at 12% per annum.
15. For the above reasons this appeal is allowed with costs and the judgment and award of the
Tribunal rejecting the appellant's claim are set aside. The petition filed by the appellant is allowed in
part awarding him Rs. 20,000/- together with costs and current interest at 12% per annum from the
date of the filing of the petition till date of payment. The insurer who is the fifth respondent in this
 6

K. Surappa vs V. Venkatesha Reddy And Others on 17 November, 1995
appeal shall pay Rs.5,000/-together with proportionate interest and costs and the balance shall be
payable by the first respondent, who is the owner of the vehicle. The claim against the other
respondents is rejected. Advocates fee Rs. 2,000/-. The insurer shall also pay the costs of this
appeal.
16. Appeal allowed.
 7