National Insurance Co.Ltd. vs Harpreet Singh And Ors. on 3 February, 2014
National Insurance Co.Ltd. vs Harpreet Singh And Ors. on 3
February, 2014
1
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR
AT JAMMU
CIMA No. D-627/2010
CMA No. 933/2010
Date of decision:03.02.2014
National Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Harpreet Singh and others.
Coram:
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Janak Raj Kotwal-Judge
Appearing counsel:
For appellant (s): Mr. C. S. Gupta, Advocate
For respondent(s): Mr. Surinder Singh, Advocate
i. Whether approved for
reporting in Press/Media : Yes
ii. Whether to be reported in
Digest/Journal : Yes
1. This is an appeal in a Motor Accident Claim case.
2. Heard. I have perused the record.
3. On 29.09.2007, S. Amarjeet Singh (hereinafter the deceased) was travelling from Kishtwar to
Jammu by a car bearing registration No. JK0 2D-9212. Respondent No. 3, Inderjit Singh Bali, who
was owner of the car, was on the wheel. The car met with an accident near a place called Thathri and
plunged into a trench. Deceased suffered grievous injuries. He died.
4. Respondent Nos. 1 & 2, (hereinafter the claimants) who are the sons of the deceased, filed a claim
for compensation under section 166 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1998 (hereinafter the Act) before the
Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Jammu (hereinafter the Tribunal) against the owner and insurer
(herein appellant) of the offending car.
5. Learned Tribunal vide its judgment and award dated 30.04.2010 found that the accident had
occurred due to rash and negligent driving by respondent No. 3 and awarded compensation of Rs.
 1

National Insurance Co.Ltd. vs Harpreet Singh And Ors. on 3 February, 2014
17,53,800/ to claimants. The Tribunal foisted liability of paying the compensation on the appellant.
6. In assessing the compensation, learned Tribunal on appreciation of evidence found that the
deceased was a Government servant serving as Manager QC in the Food Corporation of India. His
monthly salary was Rs. 24,149/. He was aged 54 years as at the time of his death. Learned Tribunal
deducted 1/3rd of the salary towards personal expenses of the deceased and took the remaining Rs.
16,100/ as his monthly contribution towards the claimants. Annual contribution of the deceased
towards the claimants thus came out as Rs. 1, 93,200/, which became the 'multiplicand' for
calculating compensation under the head 'loss of dependency'. On the basis of the age of the
deceased, applicable multiplier being 11, learned Tribunal scaled it down to 9. Compensation under
this head thus amounting to Rs. 17, 38, 800/ (1, 93,200x9). In addition, learned Tribunal awarded
Rs. 15,000/ as compensation for funeral expenses. Total compensation thus awarded was Rs. 17,
53,800/.
7. Appellant-Insurance Company has impugned the judgment and award of the learned Tribunal to
the extent of the quantum of compensation awarded to the claimants. Award has been assailed on
the ground that only respondent No. 2, who is a MBA student, should have been taken as dependent
of the deceased, whereas respondent No. 1 could not have been because he is gainfully employed as
per the evidence available before the Tribunal. It is also contended that as per the evidence, the
basic salary of the deceased was Rs. 10,600/ and the total amount which he was drawing after
deduction was Rs. 19,481/. It is also contended that both the claimants were major but this aspect
was ignored by the learned Tribunal.
8. Mr. C. S. Gupta, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, submitted that
compensation under the head 'loss of dependency' is payable only to the dependent legal
representatives of a deceased. Compensation under this head is paid for the monetary loss suffered
by the dependants. Learned Tribunal, therefore, submitted Mr. Gupta, has fallen in error by taking
the total strength of the family of the deceased as three and thereby deducting only 1/3rd of the
salary towards his personal expenses. Mr. Gupta cited Supreme Court judgment in Smt. Manjuri
Bera v Oriental Company limited and anr. 2007 (3) Supreme
620.
9. Mr. Surinder Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, on the other hand
supported the judgment and award passed by the learned Tribunal. He submitted that under section
166 of the Act, all the legal representatives of deceased are entitled to claim compensation
irrespective of the fact whether they were dependent upon the deceased or not. He cited Smt. Lalitha
and ors. v Dashanbhat Haribansh Bhat, AIR 1998 Karnatka 344 and Kulsum Bai v Kallu and ors.
AIR 200 MP 292.
10. Claimant-respondent No. 2, Harbaksh Singh has deposed before the learned Tribunal as
claimants' witness. In cross-examination he has admitted that his brother Harpreet Singh is
employed as a clerk in Doordarshan. This aspect is not disputed by the claimants. Appellant in its
objections before the learned Tribunal had clearly contended that the claimants were major and
 2

National Insurance Co.Ltd. vs Harpreet Singh And Ors. on 3 February, 2014
earning hands. No evidence, however, has been led by the claimants to prove that even claimant
Harpreet Singh was an unemployed person and dependent upon the deceased up to the time of his
death. Since claimant, Harpreet Singh is gainfully employed in a Central Government service and
there is nothing in the claimants' evidence that he was dependent upon the deceased as at the time
of latter's death, appellant's contention that claimant Harpreet Singh cannot be taken as a person
dependent upon the deceased is to be accepted.
11. Viewed thus, correctness of compensation awarded under the head 'loss of dependency' by the
learned Tribunal calls for reconsideration. It needs to be determined, whether claimant, Harpreet
Singh, is entitled to the compensation under this head?
12. Before taking up the above aspect, I will however, first take up the appellant's challenge to the
correctness of the income of the deceased as taken by the learned Tribunal. In this regard, evidence
available with and relied upon by the learned Tribunal is the salary certificate Ex.PW KA issued by
Manager (Accounts), Food Corporation of India, District Office, Jammu. In this certificate, basic pay
of the deceased is shown as Rs. 10,600/ and total salary, inclusive of allowances as Rs. 24,149/.
Deduction towards CPF is shown as Rs. 4352/, Rs. 306/ is shown as deduction towards licensing fee
and Rs. 10/ towards BF. Learned Tribunal, therefore, cannot be said to have erred in taking total
salary of the deceased as Rs. 24,149/ because nothing except income tax paid on the total salary is
deductible, while ascertaining the contribution of the deceased towards his dependents.
13. It is indisputable that learned Tribunal has applied the multiplier method, which is well
recognized for computing the amount of compensation payable to the legal
representatives/dependents of a motor accident victim under the head 'loss of dependency'. Core
question thus arising is, whether multiplier method has been correctly applied by the learned
Tribunal. This in turn would automatically lead to determination of the question involved in this
appeal.
14. The multiplier method has been explained by the Supreme Court earlier in the landmark
judgments in Kerala State Road Transport Corporation v. Susamma Thomas, (1994) II SCC 176 and
U.P State Road Transport Corporation v Trilok Chandra, (1996) 4 SCC 362 and recently qualified
and amplified in Sarla Verma and ors. v. Delhi Transport Corporation 2009 ACJ 1298.
15. It may be stated, briefly, that multiplier method involves ascertainment of the monthly income of
the deceased at the time of his death. His annual contribution towards his dependents (claimants)
depending upon their number, which is taken as 'multiplicand' and its multiplication with a figure,
called 'multiplier', to be selected on the basis of the age of the deceased.
16. Some of the important principles laid down by their Lordships in Sarla Verma may be stated
thus:
Para 18 of the reporting:
 3

National Insurance Co.Ltd. vs Harpreet Singh And Ors. on 3 February, 2014
" Basically only three facts need to be established by the claimants for assessing
compensation in the case of death:
(a) age of the deceased;
(b) Income of the deceased; and
(c) The number of dependants.
The issues to be determined by the Tribunal to arrive at the loss of dependency are:
(i) Additions/ deductions to be made for arriving at the income;
(ii) The deduction to be made towards the personal living expenses of the deceased;
and
(iii) The multiplier to be applied with reference to the age of the deceased."
17. Addition to the income where the deceased was having a permanent job, as in the case on hand,
is governed by the age of the deceased.
Para 24 of the reporting:
"11..... In view of imponderables and uncertainties, we are in favour of adopting as a
rule of thumb, an addition of 50 per cent of actual salary to the actual salary income
of the deceased towards future prospects, where the deceased had a permanent job
and was below 40 years. [Where the annual income is in the taxable range, the words
'actual salary' should be read as 'actual salary less tax']. The addition should be only
30 per cent if the age of the deceased was 40 to 50 years. There should be no addition
where the age of the deceased is more than 50 years. Though the evidence may
indicate a different percentage of increase, it is necessary to standardize the addition
to avoid different yardsticks being applied or different methods of calculations being
adopted. ...A departure therefrom should be made only in rare and exceptional cases
involving special circumstances."
18. Deduction towards the personal and living expenses of the deceased is governed by the number
of the dependents/claimants.
Para 30 of the reporting:
"14. Though in some cases the deduction to be made towards personal and living
expenses is calculated on the basis of units indicated in Trilok Chandra's case, 1996
ACJ 831 (SC), the general practice is to apply standardized deductions. Having
considered several subsequent decisions of this court, we are of the view that where
 4

National Insurance Co.Ltd. vs Harpreet Singh And Ors. on 3 February, 2014
the deceased was married, the deduction towards personal and living expenses of the
deceased should be one-third (1/3rd) where the number of dependent family
members is 2 to 3; one-fourth (1/4th) where the number of dependent family
members is 4 to 6; and one-fifth (1/5th ) where the number of the dependent family
members exceed six."
19. Multiplier is to be selected and applied on the basis of the age of the deceased from column 4 of
the table given in para 40 of the reporting in Sarla Verma's case.
20. A plain and collective reading of the principles stated by their Lordships in Sarla Verma, in
particular, para 18 and para 30 (supra) of the reporting would render it beyond any doubt that
award of compensation under the head, 'loss of dependency' is governed by the number of
dependents of the deceased and not the number of legal representatives having filed the claim. Only
such legal representatives of the deceased who at the time of the death were dependent upon him
are relevant for calculating compensation payable under the head 'loss of dependency'. Only such
claimants would be entitled to compensation under this head.
21. Judgment in Smt. Lalitha (supra) relied upon by learned respondent's counsel (supra) would not
apply to this case and does not lay down a different principle. Situation in that case was not one
where claimant was not dependent on the deceased at the time of his death. The claimant rather had
got compassionate appointment in place of the deceased and the High Court of Karnataka had held
that income earned by the claimant was in lieu of services rendered by him, which cannot be
adjusted against the compensation for loss of dependency. Likewise, judgment in Kulsum Bhai has
no application to this case as question involved therein was altogether different.
22. That a legal representative, who was not dependent upon the deceased, is not entitled to
compensation under the head 'loss of dependency' is discernible from the judgment of the Supreme
Court in Manjuri Bera (supra) relied upon by the learned counsel for the appellant. In that case the
Calcutta High Court has held that though the appellant, a married daughter of the deceased, could
maintain a claim petition in terms of section 166 of the Act, she was not entitled to any
compensation as she was not dependent upon the deceased. In appeal His Lordship (Dr.Arijit
Pasayat-J.) in para 16 of the reporting held:
"16. Judged in that background where a legal representative who is not dependent
files an application for compensation, the quantum cannot be less than the liability
referable to Section 140 of the Act. Therefore, even if there is no loss of dependency
the claimant if he or she is a legal representative will be entitled to compensation, the
quantum of which shall be not less than the liability flowing from Section 140 of the
Act. The appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent. There will be no order as to
costs...."
23. The legal position, thus, can be summarized that a legal representative of a victim of a motor
accident, who was not dependent upon the deceased, though can lay a claim for compensation, he is
not entitled to compensation under the head 'loss of dependency'. He would be entitled to
 5

National Insurance Co.Ltd. vs Harpreet Singh And Ors. on 3 February, 2014
compensation for loss to estate as well as the statutory compensation under section 140 of the Act.
24. Having stated the legal position as above, it can be said that learned Tribunal has erred in taking
respondent (claimant) Harpreet Singh too as a claimant entitled to get compensation under the
head 'loss of dependency' and in that taking strength of the family of the deceased as three and
deducting 1/3rd of the salary towards personal expenses of the deceased. Claimant-Harpreet Singh,
though a legal representative of the deceased and thereby entitled to lay the claim for compensation,
is not entitled to get compensation under the head 'loss of dependency' for the reason that he is
gainfully employed in Central Government service and was not dependent upon the deceased .
25. Strength of the family of the deceased for the purpose of 'loss of dependency' in this case should
have been and is being taken as two only and in applying the multiplier method, deduction towards
personal expenses of the deceased would be half of the salary. Since the deceased at the time of the
death was 50 plus, no addition to the income of the deceased is to be made. However, given that
total annual salary of the deceased was Rs. 2, 89,788/ (29149 x 12) and his savings, earning
deduction from taxable income was Rs. 52,224/ only so at least Rs. 15,000/ can be and should have
been deducted towards income tax. Effective income of the deceased should have been and is being
taken as Rs. 2, 74,788/- (2,89,788-15,000). Personal expenses of the deceased and his contribution
towards claimant-Harbaksh Singh for calculating compensation therefore, would be Rs. 1,37,394/
say Rs. 1,37,400/ each (half of Rs. 2,74,788/) each. This would be the 'multiplicand' in this case.
26. Deceased at the time of death was in the age group of 50 to 55. Applicable multiplier as per Sarla
Verma's case (supra) is 11. Having regard to the age of the deceased and age of the
dependent-claimant, learned Tribunal can be said to have correctly scaled down the multiplier to
09.
27. Compensation payable under the head 'loss of dependency' would be Rs. 12,36,600/- (1,37,400 x
09).
28. For the aforementioned, this appeal is found to have merit and is, therefore, allowed. Impugned
judgment and award is modified accordingly and the compensation payable would be as under:
Loss of dependency: Rs. 12,36,600/
Funeral expenses: Rs. 15,000/
Total Rs. 12,51,600/
29. Rate of interest and other conditions as provided in the impugned judgment and award shall
apply. Award amount, if deposited in this Court be disbursed accordingly.
30. Record of the Tribunal be remitted back along with a copy of this order.
(Janak Raj Kotwal) Judge Jammu:
03.02.2014 Karam
 6